Comprehensive Data Communications Notes For The Exam
----------------------------------------------------------------

This document contains pretty much everything we might need to know for the exam,
barring some of the stuff about IP addressing and protocols.

Shorthand:
- Transmitter -> Txr
- Reciever -> Rxr
- Transmission -> Tx


Topic - 00 - Intro
----------------------------------
The communications problem:
	> "How can two remote entities communicate effectively and efficiently?"

A communications system typically follows the following model:
	> Source - Device which generates data.
	> Transmitter - Transforms and encodes data.
	> Transmission System - Physical system connecting source and destination.
	> Reciever - Performs reverse of transmitter.
	> Destination - Recieves incoming data.




Topic - 02 - Data Transmission
----------------------------------
An example of a system following the model above is the way our phones communicate:
	> Source - Phone A
	> Transmitter - Base Station A
	> Transmission System - Internet
	> Reciever - Base Station B
	> Destination - Phone B

Data transmission occurs between Transmitter and Reciever.

Data encoded onto Tx signal, and transmitted across Tx system.

Encoding involves changing characteristic of signal used to represent data.

Tx signal either ElectroMag wave or electrical signal.
	> EM waves used include radio, light, and microwave.
	> Electrical includes A/C, and voltage pulses.
	> Simplest signal is a SINE wave.

Tx system is some type of Tx medium, maybe either
	> Guided - Electrical Cable, Fibre Optic.
	> Unguided - EM waves in space.

Successful data Tx depends on quality of signal and characteristics of Tx system/medium.

Signal Characteristics
	> Continuous
		- No breaks or discontinuities.
		- Example is a speech signal.
	> Discrete
		- Contains a finite number of discrete values.
		- Example is computer or binary data.
	> Periodic
		- Repeats itself after some fixed time.
	> Aperiodic
		- No repetition of signal pattern.

For a sine wave, the general equation applies:
	> s(t) = A x sin(2π x f x t + ϕ)
Where:
	> Amplitude (A) is the peak value of the wave.
	> Frequency (F) is the number of repetitions per second, measured in Hertz (Hz).
	> Phase (ϕ) is the measure of the relative position within a cycle of a signal.

Sine waves can be altered and shifted by the addition of extra components.

One sine wave might have the equation "s(t) = sin(2π x f₁t)".

It can be altered by the addition of another sine wave component:
	> s(t) = sin(2π x f₁t) + ¹/₃sin(2π x (3f₁)t)

The resultant waveform is a combined product of the two seperate ones.

We can more easily see how components make up a signal wave by viewing it in another domain.

The standard way to view a wave like this would be Time Domain, or, more simply,
on a graph where the X axis is Time, and the Y axis is Amplitude.

The new, other domain we can use, is Frequency Domain. In Frequency Domain, Amplitude remains
on the Y axis, and the X axis is now Frequency.

When we look at the Frequency Domain representation, we can see the frequencies that make
up the signal seperated out.

By Fourier Analysis, any signal can be expressed as the sum of a series of sinusoidal
components of different frequencies.

This is of fundamental importance.

Signalling concepts include:
	> Spectrum
		- The range of frequencies contained in a signal.
		- For the sample above, it wouldb be from f₁ to 3f₁.
	> Absolute Bandwidth
		- This is defined as the width of the spectrum.
		- In the example, this would be 3f₁ - f₁, so 2f₁.
	> Effective Bandwidth
		- Signals with a sharp rising and falling edge have wide Absolute Bandwidth.
		- Most energy contained in a narrower band called Effective Bandwidth.
	> DC Component
		- Signals with a component at 0 frequency.

A square wave also has an equation representation like the sine wave, but it's long
and unpleasant to look at and we don't need to know it.

We do need to know though, that because of the shape of the square wave, to 100% accurately
encode it to a signal, we would need infinite harmonics.

Because this is impossible, we must approximate the shape as best we can - the more harmonics
the better.

All Tx systems are limited in the range of signal frequencies they can carry.

This restriction is known as the System Bandwidth, and results from:
	> The physical properties of the components comprising the system.
	> The physical properties of matter and energy.

The bandwidth of a Tx system can be described as:
"The fastest continuously oscillating signal that can be sent across the system, in Hertz".

The effects of System Bandwitdth is to limit the transmission speed of data, or the Data Rate.

A higher bandwidth allows more frequency components, allowing a higher definition signal,
and more bits per seconds.

For example, the source transmits a digital signal with pattern 010000100.

A system with a significant bandwidth restriction may only let one component, or harmonic,
get through.

A system with a better bandwidth allows for more harmonics, resulting in a more readable signal.

This limitation has a direct effect on the maximum date rate achievable across a system.

Consider a system with a bandwidth of 15MHz.

To preserve the shape of the recieved signal, the speed of the transmission, or the frequency,
must be reduced.

The same effects can be shown for more complicated signals, such as a pulse train.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BPS		Time(msec)		First Harmonic(Hz)		Harmonics Sent
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
300		26.67			37.5				80
4800		1.67			600				5
38400		0.21			4800				0
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As we can see from the above table, the slower we send our data, the more readable we are able
to make it when it is recieved.

For a Tx system, the greater the bandwidth, the greater the data rate that can be achieved.

For a Tx signal, the greater the frequency or speed, the greater the:
	> Bandwidth of the signal.
	> The amount of data that can be transmitted.

In digital Tx, the square wave is used to encode data. Because this has infinite harmonics,
we approximate it using a number of harmonics that match our limited system bandwidth.

In general, for carrying data at a rate of W bits per second, a good representation can be
achieved with a system with a bandwidth of W/2Hz.

If transmitting at data rate 2Mbps (2,000,000bps), the recommended system bandwidth would be
approximately 1MHz (1,000,000Hz).

Consider the following entities:
	> Data
		- Entities that convey meaning.
	> Signal
		- EM wave with encoded data.
	> Tx System
		- The entity over which signal is transmitted.

Each entity can be considered in terms of analogue or digital as follows.

Analogue Data
	> Can take on continuous values on some interval, e.g. voice, temp, pressure, etc.

Digital Data
	> Can take on discrete values, e.g. integers, text.

Analogue Signal
	> Continously varying EM wave, representing data, may be propogated over Tx medium.

Digital Signal
	> Series of discrete, discontinuous pulses, representing data, propogated over Tx medium.

Data Tx is the communication of data by the propofation and processing of signals.

Analogue data can be conveyed by an analogue signal, e.g. a telephone.

Digital data can be conveyed by an analogue signal when a MODEM is used.

Analogue data can be conveyed by a digital signal when a CODEC is used.

Digital data can be conveyed by a digital signal, e.g. a digital transmitter.

Analogue Tx is the propogation of analogue signals only. Some physical quantity, like voltage,
changes continuously as a function of time.

There is no regard to the content of the signal.

As the transmitted analogue signal becomes attenuated, an amplifier can boost the range.

However, this also boosts noise, and may lead to the signal becoming distorted.

Digital Tx is the propogation of analogue signals with encoded digital data, or digital signals.

Digital Tx systems have regard to the encoded data.

As the transmitted digital signal becomes attenuated, a repeater can extend the range.

This recieves, recovers, and re-transmits a new signal from the original, with no new noise.

Digital is generally superior to analogue.
	> Low cost of digital electronics.
	> Data Integrity, less vulnerable to noise.
	> Capacity Utilisation - Multiplexing allows for sharing of channels.
	> Security, encryption.
	> Integration - Digitised analogue data can be mixed with other digital data.




Topic - 03 - Data Impairments
----------------------------------
A transmitted signal becomes distorted due to transmission impairments.

For analogue signals the quality can become degraded.

For digital signals, bit errors can be introduced.

Types of impairment include:
	> Attenuation and Attenuation Distortion
	> Noise

Attenuation is the weakening of a signal over distance.

Attenuation is a function of frequency, and affects the intelligibility of the recieved signal,
especially signal pulses, which can become distorted.

A technique for addressing this is the use of equalizing amplifiers, which even out signal pulses.

Noise is the insertion of unwanted signals onto the transmission signal.

It particularly affects digital signals.

The greater the noise the greater the bit error rate.

There are three categories of noise:
	> Thermal Noise
	> Cross Talk
	> Impulse Noise

Thermal noise is caused by the thermal agitation of the electrons within a conductor.

It is present in all electronic devices and conductors.

It is a function of temperature, i.e. increased temp leads to more thermal noise.

It is uniformly distributed across the frequency spectrum, so is known as white noise.

The presence of thermal noise places an upper limit on the data carrying capacity of a system.

We must ensure that the strength of the data signal is greater than the noise signal.

The term used to describe this relation is SNR - Signal to Noise Ratio.

Cross talk is unwanted coupling between signals on neighbouring Tx paths.

Coupling in this case means connecting without actually touching.

Coupling can occur between cables in close proximity, or between radio signals close to the same
frequency.

Impulse noise consists of irregular pulses or spikes of short duration and high amplitude.

Causes include:
	> Lighting and static discharges.
	> Switching of heavy electrical loads.
	> Faults within the transmission system.

Analogue signals are less affected by this type of noise, but digital signals are susceptible.

This can lead to corruption of data.

A noise spike of high amplitude, where, in the signal, there is supposed to be low amplitude
representing a zero bit, could corrupt the data.

Channel capacity allows us to study the inter-relationships of Signal BW, System BW, and
Signal Impairments.

Channel Capacity is the maximum rate at which data can be transmitted over a communications path
or channel.

The objective is to make the best use of a given bandwidth or channel.

However, from previous discussions, channel capacity is limited in practics by transmission
impairments, of which the main constraint is the presence of noise.

Two distinguished scientists, Nyquil and Shannon, had formulas.

Nyquist's Theorem:
	> C = 2B x Log₂M
Where:
	> C is the maximum data rate in bits per second.
	> B is the bandwidth of the Tx system in Hz.
	> M is the number of discrete states in the signal.

It appears from this theorem that an unlimited data rate is achievabl by continuously increasing
the bandwidth of the system, and encoding more bits per cycle.

However, as data rate increases, bit error rate also increases.

This is because noise and other impairments put a practical limit on M, and hence the maximum
data rate achievable.

Noise distorts a signal during transmission. The greater the noisem the greater the bit error rate.

A key facotr is the signal to noise ratio, SNR. This is measured in decibels.
	> SNR(dB) = 10Log₁₀(S/N)

In this, S stands for the average signal power, and N for the noise.

The other theorem is Shannon's:
	> C = B x Log₂(1 + (S/N))
Where:
	> C is the maximum data rate in bits per second.
	> B is the bandwidth of the Tx system in Hz.
	> S is the average signal power.
	> N is the average noise power.

With this formula, increasing bandwidth increases maximum data rate.

Increasing noise reduces the maximum data rate.

Shannon's Law defines an upper limit on the achievable rate.

Hence, data rate is limited by bandwidth and noise.

According to Shannon, the maximum data rate is determined by
	> Bandwidth of the system or channel.
	> Noise on the channel.
	> Every system/channel has a carrying capacity which cannot be exceeded.

This is a more practical and realistic reflection than Nyquist's, as it takes into account the
effects of noise.




Topic - 07 - Analogue Data/Digital Signal Encoding
----------------------------------
As stated before, a CODEC is used to generate a digital signal.

There are two methods to consider for encoding data onto the signal
	> Pulse Code Modulation
	> Delta Modulation

To encode analogue data onto a digital signal requires two steps.
	> Convert analogue data to digital data.
	> Encode the digital data onto a digital signal.

The first step requires sampling.

This is necessary as an analogue signal has an infinite amount of data.

Consequently, it is not feasible to send all of the analogue data.

Nyquist did work on sampling for this:
"If a signal f(t) is sampled at regular intervals of time, and at a rate higher than twice the
highest frequency, then the samples will contain all the information necessary for the
reconstruction of the original signal."

The original analogue signal is sampled at regular intervals to produce PAMS.

The PAMS are quantized, i.e. assigned a binary value.

There are considerations to be given to the number of bits used to represent each sample.

The number of bits per sample tells us how many distinct values you can have in each one, be it
8, 10, 12, etc.

On a CD, they use 16 bit samples, meaning you can have 65536 different values.

Regardless of the number of bits chosen, there will always be some level of rounding.
	> This is known as Quantization, which gives rise to Quantization Error or Noise.
	> Hence the original analogue data signal can never be truly reproduced.

Using PCM, or pulse code modulation to encode voice data results in:
	> A stream of 8-bit samples.
	> Each sample is assigned an 8-bit value.
	> This results in a data rate of 64Kbps in Europe.

This is because, as per Nyquist's Theory, the sampling rate would be:
	> 2 x (Voice Bandwidth, 4KHz) = 8000 samples per second.
	> Each sample is encoded onto an 8-bit value, so 8000 x 8 = 64,000, = 64Kbps.

Delta modulation involves the use of a staircase function.
	> Here the analogue signal is approximated by a simple mathematical function.
	> At each sampling interval, a positive or negative quantization step is added to output.

The result is a single binary digit for each sample indicating a positive or negative
slope in the original analogue signal.

There are two significant parameters:
	> Quantization Step Delta
		- Large delta reduces Slope Overload Noise
		- Small delta reduces Quantization Noise
	> Sampling Rate
		- Large rate reduces noise but increases output data rate.

Delta modulation is easier to implement than pulse code modulation, but pulse code modulation
produces better signal-to-noise ratio characteristics.

When it comes to voice data, we can use analogue or digital signals:
	> Digital (PCM)
		- Good reproduction with 256 quantization levels, i.e. 8-bit coding.
		- Required smapling rate of 8K/s for 4Khz, i.e. 64Kpbs voice channels.
		- 64Kbps voice channel reqires approx. 32KHz of bandwidth.
	> Analogue (PoTS)
		- Voice channel requires approx. 4Khz of Bandwidth.

However, digital encoding is still preferable for the following reasons.
	> Popularity Increasing
		- Repeaters can be used to no additive noise.
		- Time-division can be used to eliminate intermodulation noise occuring w/ FDM.
		- Digital signalling allows use of digital switching techniques.

Analogue data can be used to modulate an analogue signal.

This is often used to:
	> Obtain a more appropriate frequency for a transmission.
	> Allow a number of analogue signals to share a transmission medium.
		- Frequency Division Multiplexing.

There are three basic techniques available.

Ampltidue Modulation
	> Carrier amplitude varies in propertion to amplitude of analogue data.

Frequency Modulation
	> Frequency deviation is proportional to analogue data.

Phase Modulation
	> Phase proportional to analogue data.




Topic - 08 - Multiplexing
----------------------------------
It is unlikely that two communicating devices will utilise fully the capacity of a Tx link.

For example, Fibre Optic cables have a high bandwidth and can carry a lot of data, more than
would be required for most host-to-host interactions.

The spare capacity here can be used by other communicating devices.

The sharing of data comms facility in this way is called multiplexing.

The basic components required are as follows:
	> N inputs.
	> Multiplexer, MUX.
	> 1 link, N channels.
	> Demultiplexer, DEMUX.
	> N outputs.

Motivations for using this include
	> Expenses of communications equipment, lower the cost per Kbps.
	> Mant communicating devices use modest rates and can be mixed on a high-speed system.

Cable Networks
	> Many communication services are provided on cable networks.
		- TV.
		- Radio.
		- Telephone.
		- Broadband.
	> These services are multiplexed onto the subscriber connection.

Telecomms Networks
	> Fibre optic, coaxial cable, and microwave links used between exchanges, towns, cities.
	> Each comms link simultaneously carries many transmissions between multiple devices.

There are two commonly employed techniques for multiplexing:
	> Frequency Division Multiplexing
		- Analogue Technique.
		- Produces an analogue signal from multiplexed analogue/digital signals.
		- Without regard to data.
	> Time Division Multiplexing
		- Digital Technique.
		- Produces digital signal from multiplexed analogue/digital signals.
		- With regard to the data.

FDM, or frequency division multiplexing, is used when the useful bandwidth of a Tx link
exceeds the bandwidth of individual signals.

Each signal is modulated onto a different carrier frequency, also known as a subcarrier.

The carrier frequencies are combined to produce a composite analogue signal, or baseband signal.

The baseband signal is analogue and transmitted across a single transmission link.

The input data may be analogue or digital.

The bandwidth of the composite signal must be greater than the sum of bandwidths of the
individual input signals.

A guard band must be inserted between carrier frequencies to prevent overlap.

M₁(t) goes to subcarrier modulator F1, becomes S₁(t).

M₂(t) goes to subcarrier modulator F2, becomes S₂(t).

Mn(t) goes to subcarrier modulator Fn, becomes Sn(t).

These all go through ∑ and become the composite, Mb(t).

This then goes through the transmitter and becomes s(t).

M₁(t) is modulated on f₁, with range B₁ as a guard barrier around it.

M₂(t) is modulated on f₁, with range B₂ as a guard barrier around it.

Mn(t) is modulated on f₁, with range Bn as a guard barrier around it.

The reciever, on the other end, takes s(t), and turns it back into Mb(t).

Bandpass filters F1, F2, to Fn reproduce S₁(t), S₂(t), and Sn(t).

These then go through demodulators F1, F2, to Fn, and are back to M₁(t), M₂(t), to Mn(t).

Synchronous time division multiplexing is the digital equivalent of FDM.

In TDM, portions of each input signal are interleaved in time as opposed to frequency.

Incoming data carrying signals can be either analogue with encoded digital data, or digital.

The interleaving can be at the bit level, or in blocks of bytes, which determines the size of
the input buffers.

M₁(t) goes to a buffer, stays M₁(t).

M₂(t) goes to a buffer, stays M₂(t).

Mn(t) goes to a buffer, stays Mn(t).

These are then fed through a Scan Operation and become Mc(t).

Then through a modem, becoming s(t) on the modulated TDM stream.

The recieving operation is basically indentical but in reverse - Modem, Scan Operation, Buffers.

Data in this method are organised into frames.

Frames contain a cycle of time slots.

One or more time slots within a frame is dedicated to one pair of data source devices.

The combination of time slots across successive frames is called a channel.
	> Each pair of data source devices is allocated a channel for their comms requirements.

The system is synchronous because:
	> Time slots are pre-assigned to source devices.
	> They are transmitted regardless of whether the source devices are sending data.
	
Frame synchronization is required:
	> Achieved using a seperate channel.
	> Known as Added-digit Framing.

TDM is part of the public long-haul teleocomms system.




Topic - 09 - Synchronous/Asynchronous Transmission
----------------------------------
There are two types of data transmission.
	> Serial - One bit at a time.
	> Parallel - More than one bit at a time, in several channels (typically 8, 16, 32).

This course is primarily concerned with Serial data transmission.

Data are typically transmitted one bit at a time over a channel.

A high degree of co-operation is required between communicating devices.

The timing (rate, duration, spacing) must be identical for both Txr and Rxr.

For example, it a Txr is clocking out bits at 1Mbps, then the Rxr must clock in at the same rate.

To successfully recieve the data bits, the Rxr must sample an incoming bit stream once every
bit interval.

Consequently, it must know the duration of each bit.

For a 1Mbps transmission, the bit interval is 1 millionth of a second.

Timing is achieved on both sides, i.e. Rxr and Txr, using an internal electronic clock.

To achiebe successful communications, these clocks must somehow be synchronised.

There are three possibilities for this:
	> Use Seperate Clock Link
		- Not viable for computer-to-computer communication, too expensive.
	> Ingore Potential Desync Problems Using Short Burts Of Data
		- Called asynchronous transmission.
	> Embed Clocking Pulses Within Signal
		- Called synchronous transmission - framing approach, more commonly used.

With asynchronous transmission, start and stop bits determine where a character starts and ends.

This function is called framing.

The advantage of this is that it is simple and cheap, and can be used between keyboard and PC.

The disadvantage is that the extra start/stop bits cause a typical overhead of 20%, due to
2 framing bits plus 8 data bits.

Synchronous transmission is when data bits are transmitted in a large block of bits with a
particular structure.

This structure is knonw as a frame.

The Rxr must be able to identify the start and end of a frame.

It does this using a special bit pattern for the preamble, start, and postabmble, end.

Additional control info is also send within the frame for extra functionality.

In general, frames have a well defined structure with distinct fields:
	> A preamble flag, or opening flag, at the start.
	> A postamble flag, or closing flag, at the end.
	> Data and Control information fields in between.
	> The exact format of the frame depends on the data link protocol being used.




Topic - 10 - Data Link Control / Flow Control
----------------------------------
So far we have explored the Tx of signals with encoded data over a basic Tx link.

For effective communications, much more is needed to control and manage the exchange of data.

A layer of control logic is required above the physical layer in each Source/Destination device.

This logic is referred to as Data Link Control. When used, it transforms a basic Tx link
into a fully functional Data Communications Channel.

The logic implemented in Data Link Control is implemented as a set of defined rules.

This definition is known as a protocol.

Protocols are synonymous with Data Communications.

The first protocol to explore is Data Link Control Protocol.

There are six basic requirements for effective data link control:
	> Frame Synchronisation - Frames must be recognizable for the Rxr.
	> Flow Control - The sender must not overload the Rxr.
	> Error Control - Errors should be detectable by the Rxr.
	> Addressing - For a multi-point config, each station must be uniquely identifiable.
	> Control & Data on same Link - Rxr can't have to wait for control info before processing.
	> Link Management - Procedures for establishing and relenquishing link adhered to.

For flow control, the Rxr and Txr stations each allocate a data buffer of a fixed size.
	> Data remains in the buffer until processed by the receiving station.
	> Consequently, buffers can fill to capacity.

Flow control enables the recieving station to indicate to the sending station that its buffers
are full.

There are two flow control techniques to consider: Stop-And-Wait, or Sliding Windows.

With Stop-And-Wait flow control, the sending station transmits a frame.
	> The sending station must get an acknowledgement, ACK, from the Rxr before sending again.
	> The Rxr can control the flow of data by withholding ACKs.

This technique only allows for the transmission of a single frame in either direction,
also known as half duplex communications.

With Sliding Window flow control, both stations use an extended buffer size to hold multiple
frames.

The sending and receiving stations maintain a list of frames already send/recieved.

This technique allows for more efficient link utilization.

The transmission link is effectively treated as a pipeline that can be filled with many
frames in transit simultaneously.

This technique allows multiple frames to be in transit at the same time in either direction,
also known as full duplex communications.

Stations A and B each allocate buffer space for W frames.
	> B can accept W frames and A can send W frames, without any ACK send or recieved.
	> Each frame contains a sequence number
	> B sends ACKs that include the sequence number of the next frame expected.
	> B is prepared to recieve the frame starting at the number indicated.

Multiple frames can be ACK'd using a single control message. This is called implicit
acknowledgement.

Reciept of an ACK for frame 2 (RR3) followed later by an ACK for frame 5 (RR6) implies
acknowledgement of frames 3 and 4.

A maintains a list of frame numbers it can send, and B maintains a list it is prepped to recieve.

These lists can be considered windows, hence the name.

To impose flow control, the reciever can choose to send another message: RNR, or reciever not
ready.

This acknowledges the previous frames but halts the flow: RNR5 ACKs all frames up to frame 4.

To resume flow, the reciever sends a reciever ready, or RR, message. RR5 - recommence at 5.

When frames are sent, copies are held in memory on both the Rxr and Txr stations, in the
incoming and outgoing buffers respectively.

When the Rxr sends an ACK it removes the frames from memory, and the sliding window expands.

When the Txr recieves the ACK it also removes those frames, and the sliding window expands.

Both RR and RNR are positive ACKs, and acknowledge a successful transmission.

Only one ACK is required for multiple frames. RR3 acknowledges 0, 1, and 2.

This is one of the efficiencies of this technique over Stop-And-Wait.

This approach to sending one ACK for multiple frames allows for full duplex communications.

ACKs can be returned anytime, i.e. after reciept of one frame or many frames.

With the introduction of a full duplex mode, each station can be both a Txr and Rxr.

Full duplex allows for frames to travel between stations simultaneously and in opposite
directions.

With the capability to transmit data frames in opposite directions, it is possible to introduce
another efficiency: ACKs don't have to be sent as separate frames.

Instead, they can be included in outgoing data frames.

Data frames going one way can include in their control fields ACKs for frames going the other
way.

This technique is called piggybacking.

Consequently, in full duplex mode, each station must maintain two sliding windows: incoming
and outgoing.

Sliding Windows is potentially more efficient than Stop-And-Wait.




Topic - 11 - Error Control (Damian said we could omit Error Detection)
----------------------------------
The detection and recovery from errors is known as error control.

To discuss error control, the following assumptions are made:
	> Data is sent as a sequence of frames.
	> Each time a frame is transmitted a timer is set to some value.
	> Frames must arrive in the order in which they were sent, or an error is assumed.
	> Each frame suffers an arbitrary variable delay called propogation delay.

Two types of error can occur: Lost frame/ACK, or damaged frame.

Error control provides a number of techniques for addressing these types of errors.

These techniques can be considered a toolbox:
	> Each technique can be considered a tool to be applied when something goes wrong.

Error control provides the following elements:
	> Error Detection - CRC, Parity Checking, etc. (Not on Exam)
	> Positive ACK - Here the reciever sends positive ACKs to error-free frames recieved.
	> Retransmission - The Txr may retransmit a frame not ACK'd after a timeout period.
	> Negative ACK - Rxr can send negative ACK for damaged or out of sequence frames.

The most commonly used methods of error control use some or all of these elements.

Collectively these error control techniques are called Automatic Repeat Request, or ARQ.

The three most common ones in use are:
	> Stop-And-Wait ARQ
	> Go Back N ARQ
	> Selective Reject ARQ

Stop-And-Wait ARQ is an enhancement of the flow control technique of the same name.

The Txr transmits a frame and waits on an ACK before continuing.

If the frame contains an error, the reciever simply discards it and does not return an ACK.

If the frame is not acknowledged after a timeout period, the Txr simply retransmits.

If an ACK is sent but damaged in transit, the transmitter will resend, and the Rxr will now have
two copies of the same frame.

To solve this, frames are numbered alternately 1 or 0 and ACKS correspondingly 0 or 1.
	> e.g. Frame 0, ACK 1 or ACK 0, Frame 1

Go Back N ARQ can be considered an enhancement of Sliding Window flow control.

The Txr can send a number of frames without having to receive some form of ACK.

In this case, there can be a successful transmission, or damaged frame, or lost ACK or data.

If no errors occur, the receiver returns a positive ACK, e.g. RR4 or RNR6 with the number of
the next frame expected.

This ACK can be sent as an explicit message in its own frame, or, it can be piggybacked onto
an outgoing data frame.

The transmitter continues to send data frames up to the agreed window size.

If errors are detected. there are two types of response depending on the type of error:
	> Lost or damaged frames.
	> Lost ACKs.

For lost or damaged frames, the reciever sends a reject, REJ message, with the number of the
next frame expected.

The Txr, upon reciept of the REJ, retransmits all frames starting at the number included in
the message, regardless of whether subsequent frames have arrived intact.

For lost ACKs, it depends on whether the timer for a frame has expired.
	> If it hasn't, it can continue to send frames up to the window size.
	> If it has, the transmitter immediately stops transmitting data frames.
	> It then sends a special RR message with the "Poll Bit" set.
	> This is considered a command frame.
	> The Rxr must respond with an RR message to identify the next frame expected.

Selective Reject ARQ is similar to Go Back N, with the exception that the only frames that
are retransmitted are:
	> Transmitted frames for which a timer has expired.
	> Transmitted frames that were lost or damaged.

This method user a different negative ACK - a selective reject, or SREJ message.

The number of the frame to be retransmitted is included with this, for example SREJ 5.

This is more efficient than Go Back N as it minimises the amount of retransmitted frames.

However, this technique is also more complex, as the Rxr has to:
	> Store frames recieved after a damaged frame has been rejected.
	> Re-sequence retransmitted frames arriving out-of-sequence.

This requires more complex logic on the Rxr and Txr stations.

For this reason, Go Back N ARQ is often preferred over Selective Reject.




Topic - 12 - High Level Data Link Control
----------------------------------
The first three of the six data link control requirements have already been met through
various techniques:
	> Frame Sync (Asynchronous/Synchronous Communications)
	> Flow Control (Stop-And-Wait, Sliding Windows)
	> Error Control (The ARQs)

The remaining requirements can be considered using a real protocol that fulfils all of the
requirements together: High Level Data Link Control, or HDLC.

This protocol defines the following:
	> Role of each station on the link.
	> Mode of data transfer.
	> Structure of frame.
	> Exchange of data during each phase of communications.

The protocol defines three types of station:
	> Primary Station - Controls the operation of the link through use of commands.
	> Secondary Station - Operates under control of primary station, responds to commands.
	> Combined Station - Can send responses and commands.

Synchronous Tx is used, i.e. transmission is in the form of frames.

A frame is a block of data delineated by a special flag sequence (01111110).

Data and Control frames have the same basic format, with minor differences in control fields.

The frame format for HDLC is:
	- Flag			8 Bits
	- Address		8 Bits
	- Control		8 or 16 Bits
	- Information		Variable
	- FCS			16 or 32 Bits
	- Flag			8 Bits

All active stations scan incoming bit streams, initially to determine the start of a frame, and
then to determine the end of one.

The same flag pattern may be used to signify end AND start of two consecutive frames.

The flag pattern must NOT be allowed to occur inside the frame.

This is prevented by bit stuffing.

For example:
	> 111111111111011111101111110 contains the flag pattern, 01111110.
	> This is changed to 1111101111101101111101011111010.

The address field in the frame structure is used to identify stations.

This is only relevant on a multi-point link, but is always included.

It is usually 8 bits long, but can be extended.

There are three types of frame, each with their own control field format.

Information Frames
	> Carry data.
	> Can also carry piggybacked frame sequence numbers for flow/error control.

Supervisory Frames
	> Carry flow and error control data when not piggybacked.

Unencumbered Frames
	> Provide link control functions like setup and disconnect.

The information field is present in Information Frames.

This is where the data is stored. The length is variable up to a predefined system limit, but
must be a multiple of 8 bits.

The FCS field is used in error detection, calculated using all bits excluding flags.

It is used for cyclic redundancy checks, for which a 16-bit technique is normally used.

All HDLC interactions follow three distinct phases of operation:
	> Initialisation
		- The link is set up.
		- Certain parameters are agreed by each station.

	> Data Transfer
		- Data is exchanged.

	> Termination or Disconnect
		- The link is disconnected.

In initialisation, either station may initialise the link by sending one of 6 set mode commands.

Most commly used one is SABM, set asynchronous balanced mode, used with 2 combined stations.

The receiving station responds with an unencumbered acknowledgement, or UA, to accept, or
disconnect mode, or DM, to reject.

Only unencumbered frames are used in this phase.

In data transfer, each Information Frame contains two sequence numbers:
	> One relates to the outgoing frame, i.e. this frame number.
	> The other is a piggypacked ACK with the number of the next frame expected.

When piggybacking is not being used, supervisory frames are used for flow and error control.

The first frame transmitted is always numbered zero.

Either station can initiate the disconnect phase: This is achieved using an unencumbered frame
containing the DISC message.

The remote station must respond with an unencumbered frame containing the UA message.




Topic - 13 - Intro to LANs
----------------------------------
A local area network is a private commuications network.

They are used to interconnect the computing resources within an organisation.

All devices attach to a shared transmission medium, and can provide data rates up to 1Gbps.

This allows:
	> Proliferation of computing devices.
	> Growth in multimedia applications.
	> Increased client/server applications.

LAN can be classified based on their topology or layout, their transmission medium, or
the access control used for the transmission medium.

There are three broad types:
	> PC LAN, or Access Layer
		- Connect low cost devices.
		- Used in most organisations.
		- Cheap to implement and maintain, low speed and performance.
	> Backend LAN, or Core Layer
		- Used to connect high-cost devices.
		- Bulk data transfer.
		- Costly to implement and maintain, high speed and performance.
	> Backbone LAN, or Distribution Layer
		- Connects PC and Backend LANs.

The use of a single LAN is undesirable, due to reliability, cost, and capacity.

The three main LAN topologies are Bus, Ring, and Star.

Bus:
> Linear
> Stations attach to bus using tap.
> No closed loops.
> Transmissions go both directions.
> Bus ended in terminator device which removes signal.
> Example is Ethernet.

Ring:
> Set of interconnected repeaters in a ring.
> Repeaters recieve data on one link and retransmit bit-by-bit onto another.
> Uni-directional links.
> Each station attaches at repeater.
> Transmission signal must be physically removed from the network.
> Example is IBM Token Ring.

Star:
> Central hub, shared medium or switched LAN.
> Each station is attached by two links, TX and RX.
> All transmissions go by hub.
> Example is ATM.

Data on LANs is transmitted via Frames.

Each frame contains data plus control information.

Stations must gain access to the shared TX medium, and access must be provided fairly by some
controlling mechanism.




Topic - 14 - Access Techniques
----------------------------------
LANs can gain access to the TX medium using MAC, or medium access control.

Gaining access to the LAN is fundamental for TX between stations.

Access can be controlled centrally or distributedly, stations either obtain permission,
or access is controlled by all stations together.

Central Control:
	> Advantages:
		- Access logic at stations is simple.
		- No co-ordination between stations.
	> Disadvantages:
		- Single point of failure.
		- Potential bottleneck.

Distributed access is more common, and comes up later.

There are three generalised access control techniques:
	> Reservation (Not Covered)
	> Round Robin
		- Each station takes turns.
		- Very suited to stream traffic, long and continuous TX.
	> Contention
		- Each station contends for access when needed.
		- Technique is distributed by nature.
		- Works on a FISO basis.
		- Very suited to bursty, i.e. short and sporadic traffic.

Ethernet, which is an example of a Bus or Star LAN, uses a Contention MAC technique.
	> Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection, or CSMA/CD
		- Random, requires each station to contend for access to TX medium.
		- Most common technique for bus and star LANs.
		- Defined under 802.3 standard.

Under CSMA, if a station wishes to transmit data frames, the following steps occur:
	1. The station listens to the medium for activity. This is carrier sense.
	2. If the medium is clear of traffic, it begins transmission immediately.
	3. If the medium is in use, the station waits a random period of time before it
	   attempts to transmit the data frame.

In normal operation, transmitting stations can send multiple frames and would expect ACKs
in the return direction - ARQ (automatic repeat request) techniques like go-back-n or SelRej.

However, it is possible with this technique for two stations to transmit at the same time,
leading to a collision and a garbled transmission.

Collisions are an example of frames going missing. They can lead to scenarios of out-of-
sequence frames or missing RR messages.

In the ARQ techniques, a TX station:
	> Sets a timer for each frame TX.
	> Expects an ACK from the destination station.
	> Takes action after a timeout period using a Poll bit.

CSMA results in poor utilization of the link. The medium remains unusable in the time to
clear the collision, and the TX station is reliant upon a non-returned ACK to detect it.

CSMA/CD was made to include collision detection to counteract this.

As before, the station listens to the medium before attempting to transmit.

During transmission, the station continues to listen for a collision:
	> If a collision is detected, the station ceases transmission entirely.
	> The station then transmits a brief jamming signal to inform all others.
	> The station waits a random (delta) time before attempting a retransmit.

Additional collisions are dealt with using a binary exponential backoff.

If a collision occurs between transmissions from two stations, and they both attempt to
retransmit ASAP, they will just get another collision, leading eventually to deadlock.

To prevent this, the BEB algorithm is used.

After a collision, time is divided into discrete slots, called Tslots.

Their length is equal to 2t, where t is the maximum propogation delay in the network.

The stations involved randomly pick an integer from set K, i.e. {0, 1}, and wait that
number of time slots before trying again.

This set is called the contention window.

If the sources collide again because they picked the same integer, the set is doubled and
becomes {0, 1, 2, 3}.

Now the sources in the second collision use the second set, and wait that number of time
slots before trying again.

Before they try to transmit, they listen to the channel and transmit only if the channel
is idle.

This causes the source which picked the smallest integer in the contention window to
succeed in transmitting its frame.

The widening in size of the contention window is per-frame, meaning:
	> Stations A and B transmit frames A1 and B1.
	> They collide, A1 picks 0, and B1 picks 1, and A1 wins and transmits first.
	> Now A transmits A2 and B transmits B1.
	> When they collide, A2 picks from {0, 1} and B1 picks from {0, 1, 2, 3}.

This use of this exponential backoff to determine the random delay time for transmission
helps to prevent multiple devices from retransmitting their packets simulteneously and
causing another collision.

The maximum delay time is usually set to 1024 Tslot, where one Tslot is the time
taken for a signal to travel from one end of the network segment to the other.

The backoff algorithm is implemented in hardware on the network interface card.

When a collision is detected, the NIC generates a random number between 0 and 2^N-1, where
N is the number of collisions that have occured.

The NIC then multiplies the random number by the slot time to determine the delay time before
retransmitting.

The 2^N-1 is what gives us the contention window sets, i.e. 2 collisions is (2^2)-1, or
{0, 1, 2, 3}.

If the maximum number of retransmissions is reached without successful transmission, the
device gives up and reports a transmission error.

In CSMA/CD, the size of a frame must be large enough such that the collision can be detected
by the sender while still sending the frame.

As a result, the transmission delay must be at least twice the maximum propogation delay.

Without CSMA/CD, collisions would not be detected.

If the affected frame was a data frame, then the reciever would likely interpret the next
frame as out-of-sequence, and return a REJ message.

If the collided frame was returning an ACK, the transmitter would not recieve an RR.

Overall time to send multiple frames would be extended, and commuicating stations would
have to rely on timers and REJ messages to recover from collisions.

With Collision Detection added, we can detect collisions.

The TX station can stop transmitting and wait before attempting again.

Collision detection in part addresses some of the issues normally addresed with error
control, namely lost frames.

Consequently, the overall time to send multiple frames is reduced, as the TX only has to wait
for the collision to disappear from the segment in order to retransmit the frame.

The use of CSMA/CD is beneficial, as it reduces the downtime of the LAN segment.

The time to deliver multiple frames is improved.

Frame length, however, is critical.

Short frames prevent collision detection, and so frames need a minimum length.

Consequently, the MAC frame format includes a specal field called the Pad, consisting of
extra octets of random data added to the frame.

This is where we get the 802.3 MAC frame format, with a structure as such:
	> Preamble			7 Octets
	> SOF				1 Octet
	> Dest MAC Address		6 Octets
	> Source MAC Address		6 Octets
	> LLC PDU/Data			46 to 1500 Octets
	> PAD				Included in 46 to 1500 above
	> Cyclic Redundancy Check	4 Octets

Ring LANs consist of a number of stations, each of which is connected to a repeater.

These in turn are each connected to two other repeaters by unidirectional TX links in a ring.

Data are transferred bit-by-bit around the ring from one repeater to the next.

The repeaters regenerate and retransmit each bit.

Repeaters primarily perform three functions:
	> Frame Insertion - Frames are placed onto the TX medium.
	> Frame Reception - As a frame passes, the address field is copied, and if it
	  matches the station, the entire frame is copied.
	> Frame Removal - A repeater can remove a frame by not repeting it on.

The most commonly used MAC technique for ring LANs is IBM token ring.
	> This is a Round Robin technique, and is defined under the 802.5 standard.

Token Ring uses a small frame, called a token.

This token circles the ring indefinitely.

A station wishing to transmit must seize the token, and remove it from the LAN.

The token is then transformed into a start-of-frame field for a data frame.

The token is effectively removed from the ring, and replaced by a data frame.

When the frame returns to the TX station, it removes the frame from the ring, and inserts
a new token.

This is where we get the 802.5 MAC frame format, with a structure as such:
	> Start Delimiter		1 Octets
	> Access Control		1 Octet
	> Frame Control			1 Octets
	> Destination Address		6 Octets
	> Source Addresss		6 Octets
	> Data				0 Octets
	> FCS				4 Octets
	> End Delimiter			1 Octet

Advantages of token ring:
	> Access is efficient and fair under heavy traffic loads.

Disadvantages of token ring:
	> Access can be inefficient under light traffic loads.
	> There is a requirement for token maintenence, in case of loss or duplication.

Star LANs use a central component known as a hub.

There are two types, shared-medium and switched-LAN.

Shared-Medium Hub / Hub-Star LAN
	> TX from any station is repeated to all stations.
	> Only one station can transmit at a time.
	> This is the same behaviour as a Bus LAN.
	> Known as a star-shaped bus.
	> Can use pre-existing wiring as a result.

Switched LAN Hub
	> Acts as a switch, i.e. the incoming frame is only passed to the addressed station.
	> Frames from other stations can be switched simultaneously.
	> Greater performance can be achieved with this.

Switched LANs provide greater performance because there is no contention.

Multiple simultaneous communications between pairs of stations can be facilitated.

The specification for wireless LANs, or WLANs, is called 802.11.

This specification defines two types of architecture:
	> Basic Service Set (BSS)
	> The Extended Service Set (ESS)

The BSS typically comprises a number of mobile stations and a central base station known as
an access point.

The ESS typically comprises two or more BSSs with APs.

The APs are usually connected via a distribution network, typically a wired LAN.

Like BSSs, ESSs define two types of stations.
	> Stationary stations, which usually connect via the wired LAN.
	> Mobile stations, some of which can only communicate within a single BSS.

The access technique employed on a wireless LAN is CSMA/CA rather than CD.

This stands for Collision Avoidance.

Before a station can transmit a frame, it must detect activity on the shared medium.

Timers and Back-Off periods are used in the event that the medium is in use.

As with wired Bus LANs, collisions can occur.

Collision Detection relies on a transmitting station being able to detect a collision,
but this is not always the case with a WLAN.

Due to distances between stations, not all transmissions are visible to all stations,
causing the Hidden Station Problem.

As a result, the approach to collisions is to avoid them to begin with.

The CSMA/CA technique uses two messages: Ready To Send, and Clear To Send.

The timers used are called Short Inter Frame Space, and Distributed Inter Frame Space,
as well as Network Allocation Vector.

Within CSMA/CA, the DCF or Distributed Coordination Function controls the time a station
waits before initiating transmission in a free medium.

it also assigns time slots to network participants for further actions, creating a
binding time structure.

In the first step, participants monitor the network for the duration of the DIFS to
determine if it's currently free.

Here this means that no other station within range is sending a signal at the same time.

The DIFS results from the SIFS almost double the slot time, which is between 28-50 micro S.

If participants determine that the channel is free, they wait a random amount of time
before they start sending.

This duration corresponds to the contention window. This window doubles with each collision
as per the same binary exponential back-off used in CSMA/CD.

After sending the data packet, the recipient node sends a notification, if the RTS/CTS
procedure is also utilised.

This station also waits a fixed time before sending. SIFS is the time taken to process a
data package. The duration depends on the 802.11 standard, and is between 10 and 16 micro S.

The frames RTS and CTS are part of the optional extension. The procedure is upstream data
transmission.

If a participant determines the TX medium is free, the device first sends an RTS frame to
the RX.

With this, the output makes it clear it wants to start a TX and will occupy the medium for
a certain time.

The RX, in return, sends a CTS frame, and all other in-range participants are informed that
the TX is currently occupied.

Only then does the original device transmit the data.

Now it is not possible for the participants in a wireless network to detect collisions or
other interference during a transmission.

For this reason, the recieving station needs to send an ACK when the data packet has
arrived correctly.

If the ACK doesn't appear, the sender assumes a complication has arisen, and resends.

This station has preference for use of the medium, and doesn't have to wait again.

The RTS/CTS extension helps reduce collisions on the initial RTS frame.

It is still likely though that two participants might send a request to the same station at
the same time.

In cases like this, the reciever does not send a CTS frame, because the RTS has not arrived
correctly.

It is in this way that RTS/CTS can solve the Hidden Station Problem, by putting only the RTS
frames at risk instead of the data.

This can slow down the network though, because when all other stations are halted from
transmitting by the CTS, even stations whose transmissions would not have caused a collision
are stopped.

This is called the Exposed Station Problem.

Before a device in the network starts a transmission, it first sends information in the
duration field of the RTS frame to all other participants.

The station reveals how long the network will be occupied by the transmission, and every
other device enters this info in their personal Network Allocation Vector, or NAV.

This is managed internally and specifies the time when a delivery attempt is possible again.

The NAV counts down continuously and is only replenished by new information from other
stations.

A NAV can increase the timer by a maximum of 33 microseconds. This is the maximum duration
for which a transmitter may block the medium.

The devices in the network are inactive while the NAV has not yet expired. This saves
energy.

Only when the counter is set to zero does the participant become active again and check the
network.

The NAV is not only adjusted by an RTS, but by CTS and ACK as well.

The latter is the signal for all participants to reset the NAV to 0.

When participants in a network follow CSMA/CA, there are certain steps adhered to.

First, stations monitor the transmission medium, the radion channel, for transmissions.

If the medium is currently occupied, a random back-off is initiated, and the station waits
it out.

This ensures that participants do not start to check the network at the same time, and
cannot start transmitting data at the same time. 

If the network is free, the station initiates DCF. The channel is checked more thoroughly
for the duration of DIFS.

If it remains free for this time, a random backoff starts, and then the RTS/CTS exchange
begins.

If the request to send has successfully arrived at the reciever and no collision has occured,
the sender recieves permission from the returning CTS to occupy the medium.

As this happens, all other participants are informed that the network is in use.

This causes them to raise their NAV again and wait to try again to see if the channel is
free.

Then the station begins transmitting, and, when finished,the reciever waits the duration of
an SIFS before responding with an ACK to confirm success and to set the NAV to 0.

This all comes together with the 802.11 MAC frame format:
	> FC				2 Octets
	> D				2 Octets
	> Address 1			6 Octets
	> Address 2			6 Octets
	> Address 3			6 Octets
	> SC				2 Octets
	> Address 4			6 Octets
	> Frame Body			0 to 2312 Octets
	> FCS				4 Octets




Topic - 15 - Hardware Addressing
----------------------------------
LAN technologies facilitate sharing of information between all locally connected stations.

Direct communication between specific pairs is achieved using an addressing scheme.

Each station is assigned a hardware address, or MAC address, which is unique.

An example of an ethernet MAC address is 00:40:05:1c:0e:9f.

Ethernet MAC addresses are 48-bits long, and represented in Hex format.

The header within each transmitted frame contains the sender and reciever address,

This allows the LAN interface, or Network Interface Card (NIC) to filter out frames without
conferring with the CPU.

The NIC only interrupts the CPU when it has data specific to the station.

Different addressing schemes are employed on different LAN topologies.

Each station's address must be unique on the LAN to which it connects.

Address allocation can be:
	> Static - H/W manufacturer sets address.
	> Dynamic - Station sets their address at boot time.
	> Configurable - The administrator sets the address.

There are three possible types of communication on a LAN, each requiring their own address:
	> Unicast - This is station-to-station communication.
	> Broadcast - This is station-to-ALL communication.
	> Multicast - This is station-to-SOME communication.

Unicast communication requires the use of unique MAC addresses, wherein all NICs are
configured with a unique MAC address.

Broadcast requires one address to be recognised by all stations, and all NICs are
configured to recognise a broadcast address of all ones, or FF:FF:FF:FF:FF:FF.

Multicast requires one address to be recognised by some stations.




Topic - 16 - Extending LANs (Bridges)
----------------------------------
Where there is need to extend or interconnect LANs, one of three devices can be used.
	> Repeaters
		- Used to connect identical LANs, i.e. those using the same MAC protocols.
		- Repeaters do not process frames.
	> Bridges
		- Connects LANs using similar or different MAC protocols (802.3/5 etc).
		- Bridges do process frames.
	> Routers
		- Similar to bridges, but can connect together different LAN technologies.
		- Used in internetworking.

Repeaters are used to overcome the distance limitation of LANs.
	- TX signals attenuate over distance.
	- The length of a LAN segment is restricted due to attenuation.
	- When there is a need to connect stations beyond this, a repeater is used.
	- A repeater connects two segments of LAN.
	- Repeaters regenerate attenuated bits. For each one, a fresh one is reproduced.
	- Repeaters forward every frame with no filtering.

Bridges facilitate the interconnection of small LANs to create a larger LAN.

This is often preferable to just using one larger LAN.

Advantages of using small interconnected LANs include:
	> Reliability - The effects of a fault are more easily restricted.
	> Performance - Smaller LANs provide better performance to locally attached devices.
	> The majority of traffic is often between locally connected stations.
	> Security - With some topologies, all LANs can see all frames.
	> The use of a bridge facilitates isolation of high-security traffic and users.
	> Geography - Facilitates extending a LAN to isolated station clusters.

Bridges can also connect more than two LANs together.

Basic bridges only understand one frame format, e.g. 802.3, 802.5.

These are sometimes called MAC relay bridges.

Basic Bridges provide the following functionality:
	> Store and Forward
		- Operating in promiscuous mode a bridge reads all frames on one LAN.
		- It retransmits them to an outgoing port with another LAN only if the
		  destination station is on that LAN.
		- The retransmission is without modification, bit-by-bit.
		- This function is performed in both directions.
	> Routing and Addressing
		- Not all frames are copied, only those relevant to a LAN segment.
		- This implies a routing capability.

The use of a bridge does not affect how stations communicate with each other.

Unique MAC addresses are used for routing frames between stations connected to the same
bridged network.

A routing strategy is used to decide which frames are forwarded onto another LAN.

There are two routing strategies to consider: Fixed Routing and Address Learning.

Fixed Routing involves:
	> For each pair of source/dest stations a route is created in a table and stored.
	> Based on the dest address in a recieved MAC frame, it looks at the table.
	> Based on the table, it determines if the frame is to be forwarded.

This is simple, and requires minimal processing overhead, but can become very complicated
when multiple bridges are in use.

Address Learning is an alternative approach to routing.

Here, the bridge can learn the location of each station automatically, because:
	> Each incoming MAC frame contains a source address field.
	> Each LAN connects to one port only.

Using both of these identifiers, the bridge constructs a routing table automatically.

Address Learning starts at boot time. Initially the table is empty.

As MAC frames arrive, the bridge constructs the routing table using the source MAC address
and source port information.

After a period of time known as the steady-state period, the table is complete.
	> Frame filtering can commence in earnest.

Bridges that use an address learning strategy are known as transparent bridges.

Stations connected to the LAN are unaware of the existence of the bridge.

A problem with transparent bridges is looping. This arises from the use of redundant bridges.

Redundant bridges are used for reliability, in the event that one fails, another can
take over.

Because both bridges see all frames, what happens is something like this:
	> Host A on LAN 1 sends a frame to Host D on LAN 2.
	> Bridge 1 and Bridge 2 both see it, and forward it to LAN 2.
	> They both in their routing table set A to be on Port 1.
	> Each bridge sees the frame the other has forwarded.
	> They both forward them back to LAN 1, and set A in the table to be on port 2.
	> Repeat Ad Nauseam.

To overcome such a loop, we use graph theory to create a loop-free bridge network.

We create a Spanning Tree of the network by representing it as a graph:
	> Nodes or Vertices represent the bridges and LANs to which they connect.
	> Connecting Arcs or Edges represent connections between LANs and bridges.
	> Each Edge is assigned a Cost Metric, or Weight (1 = Bridge to LAN, 0 = Opposite).

First, we find the root bridge. This is the bridge with the lowest value ID.

Then, we find the shortest path from the root bridge, to every other bridge and LAN.

Then, we eliminate redundant routes. The routes with the shortest paths become the spanning
tree.

All bridge ports in the spanning tree are marked as forwarding ports, the others as blocking
ports.

Advantages of using bridges are as follows:
	> Parallelism
		- Not every frame arriving at the bridge is copied to another LAN.
		- This allows two pairs of stations to communicate simultaneously.
		- (Provided each pair is on a seperate LAN separated by a bridge.)

	> Optimised Performance
		- Stations that are likely to communicate with each other frequently can
		  be moved to the same LAN to ensure maximum efficieny.
		- (Principal of Locality of Reference).
		- Collision Domains are smaller, reducing collision likelihood and contention.
		- Without bridging, stations percieve the speed as (Data Rate/#. Stations).
		- This is significantly improved by bridging.

In summary, bridges are used to connect together LANs, creating a small interconnected
web of LANs rather than a single large one.

They can connect LANs with similar or different MAC protocols.

They contain routing functionality to filter frames:
	> Facilitates parallelism, improving performance of each connected LAN.
	> Collisions are not copied between LANs, reducing collision domain and contention.

They also contain a Store and Forward functionality:
	> Facilitates connecting fast, busy LANs to slower ones.




Topic - 17 - Intro to Internetworking
----------------------------------
It is not unreasonable to assume that an organisation may use multiple kinds of technologies
within their LAN structures.

This can lead to the creation of islands of networks, due to differences in frame formats,
electrical characteristics, and addressing schemes.

This is problematic, as there is a need to facilitate communication between any two hosts
regardless of the type of LAN they attach to.

Universal Service is a fundamental concept in networking.

With this, a user on any host in any part of an organization can send messages or data to any
other user without any knowledge of the underlying network tech.

The provision of universal service can be difficult to achieve due to it requiring several
problems associated with the interface of different kinds of network technologies be fixed.

Internetworking is the solution to this. It requires new hardware, and new software.

Additional hardware provides a physical connection between LANs using the correct NIC.

Additional software is required to:
	> Addres lack of uniqueness in MAC addresses.
	> Address lack of summary routing when using MAC addresses.
	> Introduce a single unique framing structure or format understood by all hosts.

The resulting system is a connection of physical networks known as an Internet.

There is no restriction on the size of an internet, but reliability, efficiency, and performance
are all design considerations.

The hardware component of an internet is called a router.

It is a special purpose computer used to interconnect networks.

Like any other computer, it contains a CPU, RAM, I/O interfaces (Network Interface Cards), etc.

To provide universal service, routers must pass data between LANs.

Internet Protocol software, or IP software, addresses the differences in addressing and framing.

IP introduces a single globally-unique addressing scheme, which is where we get IP addresses.

It also introduces a single framing structure called a packet or datagram, understood by all
computers.

The routers combined with the IP software makes universal access possible.

However, internets are really an abstraction. No such network exists in reality, and consequently
they are called virtual networks.







