Data Communications - Transmission Impairments
----------------------------------------------------

A transmitted signal becomes distorted due to transmission impairments.

For analogue signals, the quality can become degraded, and for digital signals, bit errors
can be introduced.

Attenuation is when signal becomes weaker over distance.

Attenuatin is a function of frequency.

Attenuation distortion affects the intelligibility of the recieved signal, especially
signal pulses, which can become distorted.

A technique for addressing this problem is to use equalizing amplifiers.

Noise is the insertion of unwanted signals onto the transmission signal.

It distorts the signal during transmission.

It particularly affects digital signals, wherein the greater the noise, the greater the bit
error rate.

The three categories of noise are thermal noise, cross talk, and impulse noise.

Thermal Noise is caused by the thermal agitation of electrons within a conductor.
	> Present in all electronic devices and conductors.
	> Function of temperature, i.e. increased temp increases thermal noise.
	> Uniformly distributed across frequency spectrum, known as white noise.

We must ensure that the amplitude of our frequency components are well clear of the
amplitude of the thermal noise.

As attenuation decreases these amplitudes, it is important to boost them back away from
the thermal noise threshold, or they may be drowned out.

The presence of Thermal Noise places an upper limit on the data carrying capacity of a
transmission system.
	> Must ensure strength of data signal is greater than noise signal.
	> Term used to describe relationship is Signal to Noise Ratio, SNR.

Unwanted Coupling can occur between signals on neighbouring transmission paths.

The term coupling means connecting without actually touching.

Coupling can occur between cables in close proximiy, or between radio signals close to the
same frequency.

This results in cross talk.

Impulse Noise is irregular pulses or noise spikes of short duration and high amplitude.

Causes include lightning and static, switching heavy electrical loads, and faults.

Analogue signals are less affected by this kind of noise, but they still are.

Digital signals are very susceptible.

When a high amplitude noise signal is crossed over a digital signal, bits will often
be transmitted wrong.

Channel capacity allows us to study the relationships between signal bandwidth, system
bandwidth, and signal impairments.

It is he maximum rate at which data can be transmitted over a communications path or
channel.

The objective is to make the best use of a given bandwidth or channel.

Two scientists with opinions on this, Nyquist and Shannon.

Nyquist's Noise Free Channel: C = 2(B)(Log₂M)

Where C is the maximum data rate in bits per second, B is the transmission system Hz, and
M is the number of discrete states in the digital signal.

For example, if M = 2, then C = 2B.

This is where the idea that good representation can be achieved with a transmission system
bandwidth of [X]/2Hz comes from.

It appears Nyquist's theorem that any data rate is achievable by increasing the system
bandwidth and encoding more bits per signal cycle.

However, as dats rate increases, the bit error rate also increases, and it becomes more
difficult to distinguish different signal states.

Noise and other transmission impairments put a practical limit on M (the number of discrete
states in the digital signal), and hence on the maximum data rate achievable.

Noise is measured in decibels.

Shannon's Noisy Channel: C = (B) * Log₂(1+(S/N)).

N in this equation is noise. When we look at the (S/N), this value decreases as noise
increases, approaching 0.

If it reaches 0, then we end up with Log₂(1), which is 0, meaning that with massive noise,
we could lose all data communication capacity.

Observations on Shannon's formula include:
	> Increasing bandwidth increases maximum data rate.
	> Increasing noise reduces maximum data rate.
	> Shannon's Law defines an upper limit on achievable data rate.
	> Hence the data rate is limited by bandwidth and noise.z

According to Shannon, maximum data rate achievable is determined by:
	> Bandwidth of system.
	> Noise on channel.
	> Every system has a maximum capacity that cannot be exceeded.

Worked Example:
	B = 1Mhz
	S/N = 251
	1x10⁶(Log₂(252)) = C (Shannon's)
	C = 8x10⁶
	
	
	
















