Data Communications - Intro to LANs
--------------------------------------------

A local area network is a private communications network.

They are used to interconnet computing resources over a small geographic area, usually
within a single organisation.

All devices attach to a shared transmission medium.

They can provide data rates up to 1GB/s.

The rationale for connecting devices as such is as follows:
	> Proliferation of computing devices.
	> Growth in multimedia applications.
	> Increased in client/server applications.

LANs have many different applications.

One is a backend LAN, or the core layer.

These are used to connect high-cost devices, like mainframes and supercomputers.

They are mainly used for the bulk transfer of data.

They are used in large organisations, and are costly to implement and maintain.

Consequently, their performance and speed are quite high.

Another application for an LAN is a backbone LAN, or the distribution layer.

These are used to provide connectivity between PC LANs and Backend LANs.

The use of single LAN is not desirable because:
	> Reliability: If single LAN develops a fault, result is devastating.
	> Capacity: Most devices connecting to a LAN reduce its performance.
	> Cost: Connecting a low cost PC device using the same type of LAN used to connect
		high cost server devices would be impractical.

There are many types of arrangements, or topologies, in which LANs can be set up.

These include Bus, Ring, Tree, and Star.

The three main ones to consider are bus, ring, and star.

Bus LAN characteristics:
	> Linear transmission medium.
	> Each station attaches to bus using trap.
	> No closed loops.
	> Transmissions travel in both directions.
	> Bus is terminated by terminator devices which kills signal.
	> Example of a bus LAN is ethernet.

Ring LAN characteristics:
	> Consists of a set of interconnected repeaters in a ring configuration.
	> Repeaters recieve data on one link and transmit them bit by bit into another one.
	> Links are uni-directional.
	> Each station attaches at a repeater.
	> The transmission signal must be physically removed from the network.
	> An example is the IBM Token Ring.

Star LAN characteristics:
	> Consists of a central hub component, of which there are two types:
		- Shared Medium
		- Switched LAN
	> Each station is attached by two links.
	> All transmissions travel via the hub device.
	> Example of a Star LAN is an ATM.

Common characteristics of LANs:
	> Data is transmitted in small blocks called frames.
		- Each contains Data plus Control Info, like HDLC.
	> Stations must gain access to shared transmission medium.
		- Access must be provided on a fair and quitable basis (control mechanism).































