Data Communications - LAN Revision
-----------------------------------------------

PACK 13
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A local area network is a private commuications network.

They are used to interconnect the computing resources within an organisation.

All devices attach to a shared transmission medium, and can provide data rates up to 1Gbps.

This allows:
	> Proliferation of computing devices.
	> Growth in multimedia applications.
	> Increased client/server applications.

LAN can be classified based on their topology or layout, their transmission medium, or
the access control used for the transmission medium.

There are three broad types:
	> PC LAN, or Access Layer
		- Connect low cost devices.
		- Used in most organisations.
		- Cheap to implement and maintain, low speed and performance.
	> Backend LAN, or Core Layer
		- Used to connect high-cost devices.
		- Bulk data transfer.
		- Costly to implement and maintain, high speed and performance.
	> Backbone LAN, or Distribution Layer
		- Connects PC and Backend LANs.

The use of a single LAN is undesirable, due to reliability, cost, and capacity.

The three main LAN topologies are Bus, Ring, and Star.

Bus:
> Linear
> Stations attach to bus using tap.
> No closed loops.
> Transmissions go both directions.
> Bus ended in terminator device which removes signal.
> Example is Ethernet.

Ring:
> Set of interconnected repeaters in a ring.
> Repeaters recieve data on one link and retransmit bit-by-bit onto another.
> Uni-directional links.
> Each station attaches at repeater.
> Transmission signal must be physically removed from the network.
> Example is IBM Token Ring.

Star:
> Central hub, shared medium or switched LAN.
> Each station is attached by two links, TX and RX.
> All transmissions go by hub.
> Example is ATM.

Data on LANs is transmitted via Frames.

Each frame contains data plus control information.

Stations must gain access to the shared TX medium, and access must be provided fairly
by some controlling mechanism.

PACK 14
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
LANs can gain access to the TX medium using MAC, or medium access control.

Gaining access to the LAN is fundamental for TX between stations.

Access can be controlled centrally or distributedly, stations either obtain permission,
or access is controlled by all stations together.

Central Control:
	> Advantages:
		- Access logic at stations is simple.
		- No co-ordination between stations.
	> Disadvantages:
		- Single point of failure.
		- Potential bottleneck.

Distributed access is more common, and comes up later.

There are three generalised access control techniques:
	> Reservation (Not Covered)
	> Round Robin
		- Each station takes turns.
		- Very suited to stream traffic, long and continuous TX.
	> Contention
		- Each station contends for access when needed.
		- Technique is distributed by nature.
		- Works on a FISO basis.
		- Very suited to bursty, i.e. short and sporadic traffic.

Ethernet, which is an example of a Bus or Star LAN, uses a Contention MAC technique.
	> Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection, or CSMA/CD
		- Random, requires each station to contend for access to TX medium.
		- Most common technique for bus and star LANs.
		- Defined under 802.3 standard.

Under CSMA, if a station wishes to transmit data frames, the following steps occur:
	1. The station listens to the medium for activity. This is carrier sense.
	2. If the medium is clear of traffic, it begins transmission immediately.
	3. If the medium is in use, the station waits a random period of time before it
	   attempts to transmit the data frame.

In normal operation, transmitting stations can send multiple frames and would expect ACKs
in the return direction - ARQ (automatic repeat request) techniques like go-back-n or SelRej.

However, it is possible with this technique for two stations to transmit at the same time,
leading to a collision and a garbled transmission.

Collisions are an example of frames going missing. They can lead to scenarios of out-of-
sequence frames or missing RR messages.

In the ARQ techniques, a TX station:
	> Sets a timer for each frame TX.
	> Expects an ACK from the destination station.
	> Takes action after a timeout period using a Poll bit.

CSMA results in poor utilization of the link. The medium remains unusable in the time to
clear the collision, and the TX station is reliant upon a non-returned ACK to detect it.

CSMA/CD was made to include collision detection to counteract this.

As before, the station listens to the medium before attempting to transmit.

During transmission, the station continues to listen for a collision:
	> If a collision is detected, the station ceases transmission entirely.
	> The station then transmits a brief jamming signal to inform all others.
	> The station waits a random (delta) time before attempting a retransmit.

Additional collisions are dealt with using a binary exponential backoff.

If a collision occurs between transmissions from two stations, and they both attempt to
retransmit ASAP, they will just get another collision, leading eventually to deadlock.

To prevent this, the BEB algorithm is used.

After a collision, time is divided into discrete slots, called Tslots.

Their length is equal to 2t, where t is the maximum propogation delay in the network.

The stations involved randomly pick an integer from set K, i.e. {0, 1}, and wait that
number of time slots before trying again.

This set is called the contention window.

If the sources collide again because they picked the same integer, the set is doubled and
becomes {0, 1, 2, 3}.

Now the sources in the second collision use the second set, and wait that number of time
slots before trying again.

Before they try to transmit, they listen to the channel and transmit only if the channel
is idle.

This causes the source which picked the smallest integer in the contention window to
succeed in transmitting its frame.

The widening in size of the contention window is per-frame, meaning:
	> Stations A and B transmit frames A1 and B1.
	> They collide, A1 picks 0, and B1 picks 1, and A1 wins and transmits first.
	> Now A transmits A2 and B transmits B1.
	> When they collide, A2 picks from {0, 1} and B1 picks from {0, 1, 2, 3}.

This use of this exponential backoff to determine the random delay time for transmission
helps to prevent multiple devices from retransmitting their packets simulteneously and
causing another collision.

The maximum delay time is usually set to 1024 Tslot, where one Tslot is the time
taken for a signal to travel from one end of the network segment to the other.

The backoff algorithm is implemented in hardware on the network interface card.

When a collision is detected, the NIC generates a random number between 0 and 2^N-1, where
N is the number of collisions that have occured.

The NIC then multiplies the random number by the slot time to determine the delay time before
retransmitting.

The 2^N-1 is what gives us the contention window sets, i.e. 2 collisions is (2^2)-1, or
{0, 1, 2, 3}.

If the maximum number of retransmissions is reached without successful transmission, the
device gives up and reports a transmission error.

In CSMA/CD, the size of a frame must be large enough such that the collision can be detected
by the sender while still sending the frame.

As a result, the transmission delay must be at least twice the maximum propogation delay.

Without CSMA/CD, collisions would not be detected.

If the affected frame was a data frame, then the reciever would likely interpret the next
frame as out-of-sequence, and return a REJ message.

If the collided frame was returning an ACK, the transmitter would not recieve an RR.

Overall time to send multiple frames would be extended, and commuicating stations would
have to rely on timers and REJ messages to recover from collisions.

With Collision Detection added, we can detect collisions.

The TX station can stop transmitting and wait before attempting again.

Collision detection in part addresses some of the issues normally addresed with error
control, namely lost frames.

Consequently, the overall time to send multiple frames is reduced, as the TX only has to wait
for the collision to disappear from the segment in order to retransmit the frame.

The use of CSMA/CD is beneficial, as it reduces the downtime of the LAN segment.

The time to deliver multiple frames is improved.

Frame length, however, is critical.

Short frames prevent collision detection, and so frames need a minimum length.

Consequently, the MAC frame format includes a specal field called the Pad, consisting of
extra octets of random data added to the frame.

This is where we get the 802.3 MAC frame format, with a structure as such:
	> Preamble			7 Octets
	> SOF				1 Octet
	> Dest MAC Address		6 Octets
	> Source MAC Address		6 Octets
	> LLC PDU/Data			46 to 1500 Octets
	> PAD				Included in 46 to 1500 above
	> Cyclic Redundancy Check	4 Octets

Ring LANs consist of a number of stations, each of which is connected to a repeater.

These in turn are each connected to two other repeaters by unidirectional TX links in a ring.

Data are transferred bit-by-bit around the ring from one repeater to the next.

The repeaters regenerate and retransmit each bit.

Repeaters primarily perform three functions:
	> Frame Insertion - Frames are placed onto the TX medium.
	> Frame Reception - As a frame passes, the address field is copied, and if it
	  matches the station, the entire frame is copied.
	> Frame Removal - A repeater can remove a frame by not repeting it on.

The most commonly used MAC technique for ring LANs is IBM token ring.
	> This is a Round Robin technique, and is defined under the 802.5 standard.

Token Ring uses a small frame, called a token.

This token circles the ring indefinitely.

A station wishing to transmit must seize the token, and remove it from the LAN.

The token is then transformed into a start-of-frame field for a data frame.

The token is effectively removed from the ring, and replaced by a data frame.

When the frame returns to the TX station, it removes the frame from the ring, and inserts
a new token.

This is where we get the 802.5 MAC frame format, with a structure as such:
	> Start Delimiter		1 Octets
	> Access Control		1 Octet
	> Frame Control			1 Octets
	> Destination Address		6 Octets
	> Source Addresss		6 Octets
	> Data				0 Octets
	> FCS				4 Octets
	> End Delimiter			1 Octet

Advantages of token ring:
	> Access is efficient and fair under heavy traffic loads.

Disadvantages of token ring:
	> Access can be inefficient under light traffic loads.
	> There is a requirement for token maintenence, in case of loss or duplication.

Star LANs use a central component known as a hub.

There are two types, shared-medium and switched-LAN.

Shared-Medium Hub / Hub-Star LAN
	> TX from any station is repeated to all stations.
	> Only one station can transmit at a time.
	> This is the same behaviour as a Bus LAN.
	> Known as a star-shaped bus.
	> Can use pre-existing wiring as a result.

Switched LAN Hub
	> Acts as a switch, i.e. the incoming frame is only passed to the addressed station.
	> Frames from other stations can be switched simultaneously.
	> Greater performance can be achieved with this.

Switched LANs provide greater performance because there is no contention.

Multiple simultaneous communications between pairs of stations can be facilitated.

The specification for wireless LANs, or WLANs, is called 802.11.

This specification defines two types of architecture:
	> Basic Service Set (BSS)
	> The Extended Service Set (ESS)

The BSS typically comprises a number of mobile stations and a central base station known as
an access point.

The ESS typically comprises two or more BSSs with APs.

The APs are usually connected via a distribution network, typically a wired LAN.

Like BSSs, ESSs define two types of stations.
	> Stationary stations, which usually connect via the wired LAN.
	> Mobile stations, some of which can only communicate within a single BSS.

The access technique employed on a wireless LAN is CSMA/CA rather than CD.

This stands for Collision Avoidance.

Before a station can transmit a frame, it must detect activity on the shared medium.

Timers and Back-Off periods are used in the event that the medium is in use.

As with wired Bus LANs, collisions can occur.

Collision Detection relies on a transmitting station being able to detect a collision,
but this is not always the case with a WLAN.

Due to distances between stations, not all transmissions are visible to all stations,
causing the Hidden Station Problem.

As a result, the approach to collisions is to avoid them to begin with.

The CSMA/CA technique uses two messages: Ready To Send, and Clear To Send.

The timers used are called Short Inter Frame Space, and Distributed Inter Frame Space,
as well as Network Allocation Vector.

Within CSMA/CA, the DCF or Distributed Coordination Function controls the time a station
waits before initiating transmission in a free medium.

it also assigns time slots to network participants for further actions, creating a
binding time structure.

In the first step, participants monitor the network for the duration of the DIFS to
determine if it's currently free.

Here this means that no other station within range is sending a signal at the same time.

The DIFS results from the SIFS almost double the slot time, which is between 28-50 micro S.

If participants determine that the channel is free, they wait a random amount of time
before they start sending.

This duration corresponds to the contention window. This window doubles with each collision
as per the same binary exponential back-off used in CSMA/CD.

After sending the data packet, the recipient node sends a notification, if the RTS/CTS
procedure is also utilised.

This station also waits a fixed time before sending. SIFS is the time taken to process a
data package. The duration depends on the 802.11 standard, and is between 10 and 16 micro S.

The frames RTS and CTS are part of the optional extension. The procedure is upstream data
transmission.

If a participant determines the TX medium is free, the device first sends an RTS frame to
the RX.

With this, the output makes it clear it wants to start a TX and will occupy the medium for
a certain time.

The RX, in return, sends a CTS frame, and all other in-range participants are informed that
the TX is currently occupied.

Only then does the original device transmit the data.

Now it is not possible for the participants in a wireless network to detect collisions or
other interference during a transmission.

For this reason, the recieving station needs to send an ACK when the data packet has
arrived correctly.

If the ACK doesn't appear, the sender assumes a complication has arisen, and resends.

This station has preference for use of the medium, and doesn't have to wait again.

The RTS/CTS extension helps reduce collisions on the initial RTS frame.

It is still likely though that two participants might send a request to the same station at
the same time.

In cases like this, the reciever does not send a CTS frame, because the RTS has not arrived
correctly.

It is in this way that RTS/CTS can solve the Hidden Station Problem, by putting only the RTS
frames at risk instead of the data.

This can slow down the network though, because when all other stations are halted from
transmitting by the CTS, even stations whose transmissions would not have caused a collision
are stopped.

This is called the Exposed Station Problem.

Before a device in the network starts a transmission, it first sends information in the
duration field of the RTS frame to all other participants.

The station reveals how long the network will be occupied by the transmission, and every
other device enters this info in their personal Network Allocation Vector, or NAV.

This is managed internally and specifies the time when a delivery attempt is possible again.

The NAV counts down continuously and is only replenished by new information from other
stations.

A NAV can increase the timer by a maximum of 33 microseconds. This is the maximum duration
for which a transmitter may block the medium.

The devices in the network are inactive while the NAV has not yet expired. This saves
energy.

Only when the counter is set to zero does the participant become active again and check the
network.

The NAV is not only adjusted by an RTS, but by CTS and ACK as well.

The latter is the signal for all participants to reset the NAV to 0.

When participants in a network follow CSMA/CA, there are certain steps adhered to.

First, stations monitor the transmission medium, the radion channel, for transmissions.

If the medium is currently occupied, a random back-off is initiated, and the station waits
it out.

This ensures that participants do not start to check the network at the same time, and
cannot start transmitting data at the same time. 

If the network is free, the station initiates DCF. The channel is checked more thoroughly
for the duration of DIFS.

If it remains free for this time, a random backoff starts, and then the RTS/CTS exchange
begins.

If the request to send has successfully arrived at the reciever and no collision has occured,
the sender recieves permission from the returning CTS to occupy the medium.

As this happens, all other participants are informed that the network is in use.

This causes them to raise their NAV again and wait to try again to see if the channel is
free.

Then the station begins transmitting, and, when finished,the reciever waits the duration of
an SIFS before responding with an ACK to confirm success and to set the NAV to 0.

This all comes together with the 802.11 MAC frame format:
	> FC				2 Octets
	> D				2 Octets
	> Address 1			6 Octets
	> Address 2			6 Octets
	> Address 3			6 Octets
	> SC				2 Octets
	> Address 4			6 Octets
	> Frame Body			0 to 2312 Octets
	> FCS				4 Octets

LAN technologies facilitate sharing of information between all locally connected stations.

Direct communication between specific pairs is achieved using an addressing scheme.

Each station is assigned a hardware address, or MAC address, which is unique.

An example of an ethernet MAC address is 00:40:05:1c:0e:9f.

Ethernet MAC addresses are 48-bits long, and represented in Hex format.

The header within each transmitted frame contains the sender and reciever address,

This allows the LAN interface, or Network Interface Card (NIC) to filter out frames without
conferring with the CPU.

The NIC only interrupts the CPU when it has data specific to the station.

Different addressing schemes are employed on different LAN topologies.

Each station's address must be unique on the LAN to which it connects.

Address allocation can be:
	> Static - H/W manufacturer sets address.
	> Dynamic - Station sets their address at boot time.
	> Configurable - The administrator sets the address.

There are three possible types of communication on a LAN, each requiring their own address:
	> Unicast - This is station-to-station communication.
	> Broadcast - This is station-to-ALL communication.
	> Multicast - This is station-to-SOME communication.

Unicast communication requires the use of unique MAC addresses, wherein all NICs are
configured with a unique MAC address.

Broadcast requires one address to be recognised by all stations, and all NICs are
configured to recognise a broadcast address of all ones, or FF:FF:FF:FF:FF:FF.

Multicast requires one address to be recognised by some stations.

Where there is need to extend or interconnect LANs, one of three devices can be used.
	> Repeaters
		- Used to connect identical LANs, i.e. those using the same MAC protocols.
		- Repeaters do not process frames.
	> Bridges
		- Connects LANs using similar or different MAC protocols (802.3/5 etc).
		- Bridges do process frames.
	> Routers
		- Similar to bridges, but can connect together different LAN technologies.
		- Used in internetworking.

Repeaters are used to overcome the distance limitation of LANs.
	- TX signals attenuate over distance.
	- The length of a LAN segment is restricted due to attenuation.
	- When there is a need to connect stations beyond this, a repeater is used.
	- A repeater connects two segments of LAN.
	- Repeaters regenerate attenuated bits. For each one, a fresh one is reproduced.
	- Repeaters forward every frame with no filtering.

Bridges facilitate the interconnection of small LANs to create a larger LAN.

This is often preferable to just using one larger LAN.

Advantages of using small interconnected LANs include:
	> Reliability - The effects of a fault are more easily restricted.
	> Performance - Smaller LANs provide better performance to locally attached devices.
	> The majority of traffic is often between locally connected stations.
	> Security - With some topologies, all LANs can see all frames.
	> The use of a bridge facilitates isolation of high-security traffic and users.
	> Geography - Facilitates extending a LAN to isolated station clusters.

Bridges can also connect more than two LANs together.

Basic bridges only understand one frame format, e.g. 802.3, 802.5.

These are sometimes called MAC relay bridges.

Basic Bridges provide the following functionality:
	> Store and Forward
		- Operating in promiscuous mode a bridge reads all frames on one LAN.
		- It retransmits them to an outgoing port with another LAN only if the
		  destination station is on that LAN.
		- The retransmission is without modification, bit-by-bit.
		- This function is performed in both directions.
	> Routing and Addressing
		- Not all frames are copied, only those relevant to a LAN segment.
		- This implies a routing capability.

The use of a bridge does not affect how stations communicate with each other.

Unique MAC addresses are used for routing frames between stations connected to the same
bridged network.

A routing strategy is used to decide which frames are forwarded onto another LAN.

There are two routing strategies to consider: Fixed Routing and Address Learning.

Fixed Routing involves:
	> For each pair of source/dest stations a route is created in a table and stored.
	> Based on the dest address in a recieved MAC frame, it looks at the table.
	> Based on the table, it determines if the frame is to be forwarded.

This is simple, and requires minimal processing overhead, but can become very complicated
when multiple bridges are in use.

Address Learning is an alternative approach to routing.

Here, the bridge can learn the location of each station automatically, because:
	> Each incoming MAC frame contains a source address field.
	> Each LAN connects to one port only.

Using both of these identifiers, the bridge constructs a routing table automatically.

Address Learning starts at boot time. Initially the table is empty.

As MAC frames arrive, the bridge constructs the routing table using the source MAC address
and source port information.

After a period of time known as the steady-state period, the table is complete.
	> Frame filtering can commence in earnest.

Bridges that use an address learning strategy are known as transparent bridges.

Stations connected to the LAN are unaware of the existence of the bridge.

A problem with transparent bridges is looping. This arises from the use of redundant bridges.

Redundant bridges are used for reliability, in the event that one fails, another can
take over.

Because both bridges see all frames, what happens is something like this:
	> Host A on LAN 1 sends a frame to Host D on LAN 2.
	> Bridge 1 and Bridge 2 both see it, and forward it to LAN 2.
	> They both in their routing table set A to be on Port 1.
	> Each bridge sees the frame the other has forwarded.
	> They both forward them back to LAN 1, and set A in the table to be on port 2.
	> Repeat Ad Nauseam.

To overcome such a loop, we use graph theory to create a loop-free bridge network.

We create a Spanning Tree of the network by representing it as a graph:
	> Nodes or Vertices represent the bridges and LANs to which they connect.
	> Connecting Arcs or Edges represent connections between LANs and bridges.
	> Each Edge is assigned a Cost Metric, or Weight (1 = Bridge to LAN, 0 = Opposite).

First, we find the root bridge. This is the bridge with the lowest value ID.

Then, we find the shortest path from the root bridge, to every other bridge and LAN.

Then, we eliminate redundant routes. The routes with the shortest paths become the spanning
tree.

All bridge ports in the spanning tree are marked as forwarding ports, the others as blocking
ports.

Advantages of using bridges are as follows:
	> Parallelism
		- Not every frame arriving at the bridge is copied to another LAN.
		- This allows two pairs of stations to communicate simultaneously.
		- (Provided each pair is on a seperate LAN separated by a bridge.)

	> Optimised Performance
		- Stations that are likely to communicate with each other frequently can
		  be moved to the same LAN to ensure maximum efficieny.
		- (Principal of Locality of Reference).
		- Collision Domains are smaller, reducing collision likelihood and contention.
		- Without bridging, stations percieve the speed as (Data Rate/#. Stations).
		- This is significantly improved by bridging.

In summary, bridges are used to connect together LANs, creating a small interconnected
web of LANs rather than a single large one.

They can connect LANs with similar or different MAC protocols.

They contain routing functionality to filter frames:
	> Facilitates parallelism, improving performance of each connected LAN.
	> Collisions are not copied between LANs, reducing collision domain and contention.

They also contain a Store and Forward functionality:
	> Facilitates connecting fast, busy LANs to slower ones.










































