Data Communications - Access Control
------------------------------------------
This is where the idea of a MAC address comes from - Medium Access Control Address.

Gaining access to an LAN is a fundamental requirement for data transmission between stations.

Cess can be controlled either centrally, obtaining permission before accessing the medium,
or distrbuted, where is controlled by stations acting together.

Characteristics of centrally controlled access techniques:
	> Advantages:
		- Access logic required is simple.
		- No co-ordination required between stations.

	> Disadvantages:
		- Single point of failure - controlling device can affect all others.
		- Potential bottleneck - All requests must be sanctioned by control device.

Distributed access techniques are more commonly used.

There are three generalised access control techniques.
	> Reservation:
		- Medium divided into time slots.
		- Station wishing to send reserves future slots.
		- Very suited to stream traffic (long, continuous, irregular basis).

	> Round Robin
		- Each station takes turns to transmit.
		- Efficient with a lot of data on a regular basis.

	> Contention
		- Each station contends for access when needed.
		- Distributed technique by nature.
		- Works on a first come/first served basis.
		- Suited to bursty traffic (short, sporadic transmissions).

Ethernet uses a contention technique.

Ethernet is an example of a Bus or Star LAN. The technique it uses is a Contention MAC.

This is also known as Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD).

This is random, and requires each station to contend for access to the shared transmission
medium.

It is the most commonly used MAC technique for bus and star LANs.

It is defined under IEEE802.3 standard.

If a station wishes to transmit data frames, the following steps should be followed:
	> The station listens to the medium for activity.
	> If the medium is clear of traffic, transmission begins immediately.
	> If the medium is in use, the station waits a random time before attempting.

In normal operation, tansmitting stations can send multiple frames and would expect ACKs in
the return direction:
	> ARQ techniques: Go-Back-N and Selective Reject.

The problem with this technique is that is is possible for two or more stations to attempt
to transmit at around the same time.

This will lead to a collision, i.e. a garbled transmission, resulting from the signals
colliding with each other.

Collisions are an example of frames "going missing".

COllisions can lead to out-of-sequence frame and missing RR messages.

In the ARQ techniques, a transmitting station:
	> Sets a timer for each frame transmission.
	> Expects an ACK from the destination station.
	> Takes action after a timeout period using command/responses.

SCMA results in poor utilization of the link:
	> The medium remains unusable for the time taken to clear the collision.
	> The transmitting station is reliant upon the non-return of an ACK to detect problems.

To counteract this inefficiency, CSMA was extended to include collision detection (CSMA/CD).

As before, the station listens to the medium before attempting to transmit.

During transmission, the station continues to listen to the medium for a collision.

This is known as collision detection:
	> If present, the station ceases transmission immediately.
	> The station then transmits a brief jamming signal to inform all other stations.
	> The station waits a random amount of time (delta) before attempting to retransmit.

Additional collisions are dealth with using a binary exponential backoff.

Without the use of CSMA/CD, collisions would not be detected.

If the affected frame was a data frame, the reciever would likely interpret it as out-of-
sequence, and return an REJ message.

If the frame was an ACK, the transmitter would not recieve an RR message for an outstanding
frame.

Consequently, the overall time to send multiple frames would be extended, as the communicating
station would have to rely on timers and REJ messages to recover from collisons.

With collision detection, the colliding frames are detected.

The tansmitter would stop transmitting the frame and wait a period before attempting to
retransmit, with the reciever eventally getting the frame.

In part, collision detection addresses some of the issues normally addressed with error
control, namely 'lost' frames.

Consequently, the overall time to send multiple frames would be reduced, as the transmitter
would only have to wait for the collision to disappear from the segment in order to
retransmit the frame.

The use of CSMA/CD is usually quite beneficial, as it improves link utilization by
reducing downtime in the LAN segment.

However, frame size is critical:
	> Short frames prevent working collision detection.
	> Frames have to be a minimum length.
	> Consequently the MAC frame format inludes a special field called the Pad.

802.3 format:
7:Preamble  ->  1:SOF  ->  6:Destination MAC Address  ->  46-1500:LLC PDU  ->  4:CRC

Ring LANs consit of a number of stations, in turn connected to a number of repeaters.

These are in turn connected to two other repeaters by unidirectional transmission links to
form a ring.

Data are transferred bit-by-bit around the ring, from one repeater to the next.

Each repeater regenerates and retransmits each bit.

Repeaters perform three functions:
	> Frame Insertion: frames with addresses are place on the Tx medium by the network.
	> Frame Reception: as a frame passes through a repeater, the address field is copied
	  to the station. If it recognises it, the whole field is copied.
	> Frame Removal: A repeater can remove a frame by not repeating it to the next link.

An access technique used in Ring LANs, and the most commonly used MAC technique, is IBM
token ring.

Token Ring uses a small frame, called a token. The token circulates around the ring,
indefinitely.

A station wishing to transmit data, must sieze the token and remove it from the LAN.

The token is then transformed into a start-of-frame field for a data frame. More fields are
added to construct a data frame.
	> The token is effectively removed from the ring and replaced by a data frame.
	> When the frame returns to the transmitting station it removes the frame from
	  the ring and inserts a new token.

Token Ring advantages:
	> Access is efficient and fair under heavy traffic loads.

Token Ring disadvntages:	
	> Access can be inefficient under light traffic loads.
	> There is a requirement for token maintenance.
		- Tokens can be lost or duplicated, one station assigned responsibility.

A Star LAN uses a central component known as a hub.

There are two types of hub: Shared-Medium, and Switched LAN.































