Data Communications - Access Techniques
--------------------------------------------

Star LANs use a central component known as a hub.

There are two types of hub: shared medium, and switched LAN.

A shared medium hub:
	> Transmission from any station is repeated to all stations.
	> Only one station can transit at any one time.
	> This is the same behaviour as bus LAN.
		- As a result, this is also known as a star shape bus LAN.
	> Advantages of this type include that you can use existing buiding wiring.

A switched LAN hub:
	> Acts as a switch, i.e. the incoming frame is only passed to the addressed station.
	> Frames from other stations can be switched simultaneously.
	> Greater performance with this than shared medium.

Switched LANs provide greater performance due to not having to deal with contention.

Therefore, multiple simultaneous communications between pairs of stations can be facilitated.

The specification for wireless LANs is called IEEE 802.11.

THis spec defines two types of architecture: the Basic Service Set and Extended Service Set.

The BSS typically comprises a number of mobile stations and a central base station called
an access point.

THe ESS typically comprises two or more BSSs with access points. The APs are usually
connected via a distribution network.

Like BSSs, ESSs define two types of stations:
	> Stationary stations, connect via the Wired LAN, communicate on single wired LAN.
	> Mobile stations, some of which can only communicate with a single BSS.

The access techique deployed on a wireless LAN is CSMA/CA.

THis is similar to CSMA/CD, as follows:
	> Before a station can transmit, it must detect activity in the shared medium.
	> Timers and Back-off periods are used if the frame is in use.

Collision detection within a Within a Wired LAN relies on a Tx station being able to detect
a collision.

Due to distances between stations, not all transmissions are visible to all stations.

This is called the hidden station problem.

The range of B and the range of C both have them in range of A, but not of each other.

If they wish to communicate, they must do so through A, but if they both try to communicate
with A at the same time, the messages can collide, and lead to A recieving nothing.

The approach to dealing with collisions on a WLAN is to avoid them in the first place.

This technique is called collision avoidance.

This technique uses fixed timers and a message exchange technique. When used with CSMA
this is called CSMA/CA.

The message exchange uses two messages: Ready to Send and Clear to Send.

The timers used are called Short Inter-Frame Space and Distributed Inter-Frame Space,
as well as Network Allocation Vector.
























