Data Communications - Signals
----------------------------------------

When home internet was first introduced, it was coming in on phone lines, which had an
in built limit of around 4khz. As a result, internet bandwidth was incredibly slow.

In general, for a digital signal carrying data at a rate of [X]bps, good representation
can be achieved with a transmission system bandwidth of [X]/2Hz.

If the data rate is 2Mbps, the system bandwidth to facilitate it would be around 1Mhz.

If we can't increase the system bandwidth, which is often, as this is usually a hard system
limit, we can instead slow the data rate for a clearer signal.

If we try to push 19200 bps through a given low-bandwidth system, we get only 1 harmonic
through.

If we slow down and only use 300 bps in the same system, we get 80 harmonics through.

When we improve the system bandwidth, we improve maximum effective data rates.

Data are entities that convey meaning.

Signal is electromagnetic waves encoded with data.

Transmission systems are the entities over which signal is transmitted.

Each of these three can be considered in terms of digital or analogue.

Analogue Data takes on continuous values on some interval - voice, pressure, temperature, etc.

Digital Data takes on discrete values, e.g. integers, text, etc.

An analogue signal is a continuously varying electromagnetic wave, representing data, that
may be propogated over a transmission medium.

A digital signal is a sequence of discrete, discontinuous voltage pulses, representing data,
that may be propogated over a transmission medium.

Data transmission is the communication of data by the propogation and processing of signals.

Analogue data can be conveyed by an analogue signal, e.g. telephone.

Digital data can also be conveyed by an anaologue signal when a MODEM is used.

The modem combines a modulator and demodulator.

There exists both amplitude modulators, which uses amplitude to carry data, and frequency
modulators, which use frequency to carry data.

These two are where the "FM" and "AM" in radio signals comes from.

Analogue data can be conveyed by a digital signal when a CODEC is used.

This, like modem with modulator and demodulator, is a combination of coder and decoder.

Digital data can be conveyed by a digital signal, e.g. digital transmitter.

Analogue transmission is the propogation of analogue signals only.

They consist of some physical quantity, e.g. voltage, which changes continuously as a
function of time.

There is no regard for the content, i.e. the encoded data, of the signal.

As the transmitted analogue signal becomes attenuated with distance, an amplifier can
extend the range. 

Attenuation is the loss in power of the signal, due to things like resistance in the medium.

An amplifier boosts the power of the signal back up to what it previously was.

However, using an amplifier to extend the range boosts noise, and therefore distortion, and
so cannot be repeated.

Digital transmission is the propogation of analogue signals, with encoded digital data, or
digital signals.

Digital transmission systems have regard to the encoded data.

As the transmitted digital signal becomes attenuated with distance, a repeater can extend
the range.

A repeater recieves the transmitted signal, recovers the digital data, and re-transmits a
new signal with no noise added.

Digital is the superior method of transmission.

This is due to many factors:
	> Low cost of digital electronics.
	> Data integrity - signal maintained free of noise.
	> Capacity Utilisation - different signals multiplexed to share channels.
	> Security - Encryption can be more easily applied.
	> Integration - Digitised analogue data can be mixed with digital and share facilities.

Not everything can be digital though, and we may need to simply accept signal impairments
as a result, such as noise, etc.


















