Data Communications - Protocols and Framing
----------------------------------------------------

Virtual communication is vertical, and physical or is horizontal.

If your destination exists outside of your LAN, we need a new framing structure, as frames
won't work.

If the whole world was just a LAN we wouldn't need packets/datagrams.

Using a repeater, packets don't get moved up layers when they come in, like with a router.

Repeaters simply repeat the same bits out as they got in.

This means they do not need a network or data link layer, only physical

Bridges are more complex: they have a MAC routing table, meaning that unlike repeaters,
they do actually have a data link layer.

Routers are the most complex, having physical and data link, and also a network layer.

Levels of functionality:
	> Repeater - Physical
	> Bridge - Physical, Data Link
	> Network - Physical, Data Link, Network

Routers only go up to Network because all they need to do is route packets, meaning they
don't need any higher levels of complexity.

Routers store information about where to send packets in a routing table.

Having made a routing decision and determined a next hop, the packet must be sent out.

The physical network does not understand the datagram format.

Instead, the datagram is placed inside a hardware frame.

This is called encapsulation.

THis process is applied on each leg of the transmission path.

The datagram is stored in memory without the additional frame header information.

The size of the frame header may vary as it traverses different network technologies.

Each time a datagram leaves a router, the next hop IP address goes with it, but never goes
inside the frame.

Instead, it is added as part of the header.

There are three ways of resolving an IP address to a MAC address.

The first is table lookup.

In our example, Host A wants to send to Host B, or R1, on the same network.

It has a table with the listed MAC and IP addresses of anywhere it can send to, and so
it looks up the IP and gets the correct MAC address.

The next way is closed-form computation.

For configurable MAC addressing, it is possible to choose addresses that make this possible.

A resolver computes a MAC address based on the IP address, or consisting of the IP address.

THe last way is message exchange.

To resolve an address, a station sends a message across a network and recieves a reply.

This is a distributed approach.

There is another protocol, Address Resolution Protocol or ARP, for this.

ARP can have a Request Message and a Reply message.

The request contains an IP address, and goes out into the network.

The station with that IP picks it up, and sends back a reply with saying, "this is my IP,
here is my MAC".

The ARP message structure contains a sender hardware address, sender protocol address,
target hardware address, and target protocol address.

It also contains hardware type and length, and protocol type and length, as well as the
operation, request or reply.

The message is sent to every device on the LAN, meaning it has to be made into a frame
to be put onto the LAN.








