Data Communications - IP Addressing
----------------------------------------------

An internet must operate like any other network.

It must allow hosts to send and recieve data, which requires some addressing scheme.

Addressing is a critical component of internet abstraction.

The Internet Protocol, or IP, defines such an addressing scheme.

IP addressing is independent of the underlying physical addressing schemes.

Each host/router interface is assigned a unique 32-bit IP address.

This address is used in packets that are sent across the internet.

Each IP address consists of a prefix and a suffix.

Each physical network is assigned a unique network number, which forms the network prefix
part of a host's address.

The host suffix uniquely identifies the host on that network.

Nework numbers/prefixes are assigned globally, host suffixes are assigned locally.

Representing IP addresses in 32-bit binary form is only suitable for computers.

A human friendly way of representing IP addresses is known as dotted-decimal notation.

Here, each octet of the IP address is represented as a decimal value, seperated by a dot.

This is where we get addresses like "129.52.6.0".

Each decimal value represents 8 bits.

Consequently, the range of each decimal value is 0-255.

The IP addressing scheme must accomodate small and large internets.

CLassful Addressing was the first attempt to organise the IP address space.

Here, the IP address space was divided into 5 classes.

Each class had different size prefix and suffix portions, to accomodate small and large
networks.

The first four bits identify the class to which the address belongs.
	> A - 0
	> B - 10
	> C - 110
	> D - 1110
	> E - 1111

Classes A, B, and C are the primary classes, used for host addressing.

Class D addresses are for multicasting, and E was reserved for future use.

For class A addresses, the first octet is the network prefix and the last three are the host.

Class B has a 50/50 split, and class C has the opposite ratio to A.

The seperation of prefix and suffix is important for routing.

Routers are responsible for directing packets to their destination.

The router needs to look at the address to make a decision about where to send a packet.

For example, with letters, we have national and local post offices.

National Sorting Offices tend to be far from the destination, and only examine the County
or Town, before sending the letter to the local post office there.

The Local Office then looks at the street name and house number to make the final delivery.

This is how the prefix and suffix work to send packets.

Routers far away from the destinaton need only examine network prefixes, and the closest
router to the destination then examines the entire address, including suffix.

Classful IP addresses are self-identifying as the network prefix portion can be computed
from the address itself.

THe first four bits will determine the class, and hence the network prefix.

This makes it easy for far away routers to route the packet towards the destinaton.

While dotted-decimal notation represents IP addressing in a human readable form, it also
hides the first four bits.

To determine address class from the dotted-decimal representation, we rely on range values
for the first octet:
	> A ~ 0-127
	> B ~ 128-191
	> C ~ 193-223

A router wants to move a packet along as quickly as possible.

CLassful addressing speeds this up, as the router must only check the first 1, 2, 3, or 4
bits against its routing table before moving the packet along.

Unfortunately, classful addressing is not very efficient.

Within only a few years, we began to run out of IPv4 classed addresses to give hosts.
	


































