Data Communications - Waves
-------------------------------------------
One method of communicating using waves is to consider a peak to be a 1, and a trough to
be a 0.

This allows for communication in binary code.

A simple, singluar sine wave, will simply transmit 0, 1, 0, 1, and so on, but by combining
waves we can send more complex signals.

A general equation applies to the sine wave:

	s(t) = A(sin(2π x ft + Φ))

A is the amplitude, the peak value of the waveform.

F is the number of repetitions per second, given in hertz.

Φ is the phase, a measure of the relative position within a cycle.

Spectrum is the range of frequencies contained within a signal.

This means we describe is as being from the lowest to highest frequency.

Absolute Bandwidth is the width of the spectrum.

This means the highest frequency minus the lowest.

Effective Bandwidth - signals with sharp rising and falling edges have wide absolute bandwidth,
and most energy is contained in a relatively narrow band called the effective bandwidth.

DC components signal with a component at zero frequency.

Square Waves consist of instantaneous transitions between two levels.

Square Wave signals have a massive bandwitdth, and are the type that computers like to use.

However, because of the huge bandwitdth, it runs into problems during transmission.

All transmission systems are limited in the range of frequencies they can carry.

This is known as system bandwidth, and comes from the physical properties of the
components, and matter and energy.

The bandwidth of a system can be described as "the fastest continually oscillating signal
that can be sent across the system, represented in hertz (Hz)."

The effect of system bandwidth is to limit the speed of the transmission of data.

If a signal has a bandwidth higher than the maximum of the system it is sent on, it will
become distorted.

The higher the bandwidth of the system, and the closer it gets to that of the signal,
the closer the recieved signal gets to what was transmitted.

An example of this is in phone calls: some systems to have a lower bandwidth than the
bandwidth of the human voice, and so people sound different on the phone.

The source of the signals transmits a digital signal with the bit pattern 010000100.

A transmission system with a low bandwidth, like 500hz, imposes a significant restriction,
and only one component harmonic makes it through.

A system with a higher bandwidth, 4000hz, allows more component harmonics through, and
results in a more readable signal on the other side.

Ultimately what we want is to use a bandwidth which will get enough of the harmonics
through for the signal to still be legible on the other side.

We don't need to pick up every single harmonic, just enough to make out the data.
























