Data Communications - High Level Data Link Control
----------------------------------------------------
The first three of six data link control requirements have been examined through the
following techniques:
	> Frame Synchronisation (A/Synchronous)
	> Flow Control	(Stop and Wait, Sliding Windows)
	> Error Control (Stop and Wait, Go back N, Selective Reject ARQ)
	> Addressing
	> Control and Data on same Link
	> Link Management

The reason for using these techniques is to turn a transmission link into a fully
functioning, reliable, effective, data communication link.

The reamining requirements can be considered together under one protocol: High Level Data
Link Control, or HDLC.

This is a widely used and important protocol.

It defines the following:
	> The role of each station on the link.
	> The mode of data transfer.
	> The structure of the frame.
	> The exchange of data during each phase of communication.

The protocol defines three types of station:
	> Primary - Controls operation of link through commands.
	> Secondary - Operates under control of primary, responds to commands.
	> Combined - Combines both, sends commands and responses.

Synchronous transmission is used, i.e. data is in the form of frames.

A frame is a block of data delineated by a special flag character or sequence.

Data and Control frames have the same basic format with some minor differences in relation
to the control fields.

All active stations scan incoming bit streams to determine the start of a frame.

If it recieves one, the station continues to scan, looking for the end of a frame.

The flag pattern, 01111110, cannot be allowed to occur within the frame.

This is achieved via bit stuffing.

The address field in HDLC is used to identify the stations:
	> This is only relevant on a multi-point link.
	> Does not apply to a point-to-point link.

The address field is usually 8 bits long but can be extended.

There are three types of frame in HDLC.
	> Information frames carry data.
	> Supervisory frames carry FLow and Error control data.
	> Unnumbered frames provide link control functions like setup and disconnect.

The type of frame is stored in the Control field.

The information field stores the data a frame is carrying, and is present in I-frames.

Its length is variable up to a predefined system limit, but must always be a multiple of
8 bits.

The FCS field is used in Error Detection. It is an error detection calculated using all bits
within the frame excluding flags.

Recall Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) is a technique used, normally with 16 bits.

All HDLC interactions follow three distinct phases of operation:
	> Phase 1 - Initialisation. Link is set up, parameters agreed upon.
	> Phase 2 - Data Transfer. Data is exchanged.
	> Phase 3 - Termination. Link is disconnected.

Initialisation:	
	> Either station may initialise the link by sending one of 6 set mode commands
	   depending on the mode required.
	> Most commonly used is SABM, Set Asynchonous Balanced Mode, which is used with two
	   combined stations.
	> The recieving station responds with an Unnumbered Acknowledgement, to accept,
	   or Disconnet Mode, to reject it.
	> UA to accept, DM to reject.
	> Only U frames are used here.

Data Tranfer:

	> After initialization, data exchange takes place.
		- Takes place with I frames, which carry the data.

	> Each I -frame contains two sequence numbers.
		- One relates to the outgoing, current frame.
		- The ther is a piggybacked ACK for a frame recieved, the next expected.
		- When piggybacking not used, S frames used for error/flow control.
		- First frame transmitted is always numbered 0.

Either station can initiate the disconnect phase.

This is achieved using a U frame containing the DISC message.

The remote station must respond with a U frame containing the UA message.









































	