Data Communications - Encoding Methods
-------------------------------------------------------

Modulation is the technique used to encode digital data onto an analogue signal.

The most common application for modulation is the transmission of data across the Plain old
Telephone System, or PoTS.

There are three types of modulation technique: Amplitude, Phase, and Frequency shift keying.

With each technique, the modulator has two inputs: one for the data stream, and one for the
carrier signal, a sine wave of frequency F/C Hz.

The modulator modifies one of the parameters of the carrier signal to represent the data,
and the modulated signal is then passed to output.

PSK, or phase shift keying, is a modulation process which modulates, or changes, the phase
of a constant frequency to represent bits.

To send a zero, we can send a constant signal, with the same phase, amp, and frequency.

To send a one, we can interrupt this by shifting the phase.

ASK, or amplitude shift keying, modifies the amplitude of the carrier signal to represent
the data. It allows one of the following to pass to the output:
	> A full amplitude signal.
	> A zero amplitude signal.
	> Recall the carrier is operating at F/C Hz.

For encoding purposes:
	> To encode binary zero, the zero amplitude is passed to output.
	> To encode binary one, the full amplitude carrier is passed.	
	> These are also called Space and Mark.

FSK, or frequency shift keying, modulates the frequency to represent data.

For this, the modulator can be considered as having access to two other signals.
	> One operating at F¹ Hz.
	> Another operating at F² Hz.
	> Where F¹ < F/C < F², and F/C is the frequency around which the signal is centered.

For zero, F¹ is passed to the output, and for one, F² is passed to the output.

FSK can be used for Full Duplex communications, wherein two analogue signals can co-exist
on a single transmission path, provided they are of different frequencies.

This allows for communications in both directions simultaneously.

Each direction of communication occurs in seperate spectrums, with each spectrum representing
a seperate channel of communication, an uplink and a downlink channel (1170 Hz and 2125 Hz).

Within each channel, two seperate frequencies are used to encode Marks and Spaces.

With each of the shift keying techniques in mind, the following analysis can be considered:
	> With each technique, two versions of the carrier are used to represent the data,
	  i.e. two amps, freqs, or phases.
	> This presents two different levels.
	> Analogue encoding allows for larger M values to be used in Nyquist's formula.

Quadrature PSK is similar to PSK except the modulator can transmit the signal in one of four
forms:
	> In-Phase, i.e. no modification
	> Phase-Shifted by multiples of 90∘.

Using this technique provides four different levels to encode data, meaning that each
modification of the carrier signal is able to carry 2 bits instead of 1 bit.

For encoding purposes, consider:
	> 00 is unmodified.
	> 01 is the signal shifted by 90∘.
	> 10 is the signal shifted by 90∘ x 2, or 180∘.
	> 11 is the signal shifted by 90∘ x 3, or 270∘.

Modulation rate is measured in baud. The relationship between modulation and data rates is:
	> D = R / B.
	> Where D = Mod, R = Data Rate, and B = Bits/second.

It can also be expressed as D = R/log₂L, where D and R are as above and L is the number
of levels per signal element.

The BW of the transmission systen limits the frequencies that can be transmitted, which limits
the data rate.

From analysis of phase shift keying techniques it was shown that:
	> PSK allows for one-bit encoding per signal element.
	> QPSK allows for two-bit encoding per signal element.

If the carrier signal is transmitted at the maximum frequency allowed by the Tx Sys BW then
it is clear that the Data Rate is higher when using QPSK.





































