Data Communications - Data Encoding
-------------------------------------------------
Data are propogated from point-to-point by encoding data onto signals.

The data may be analogue or digital.

Likewise the signals may be analogue or digital.

CODECs produce digital signals, MODEMs produce analogue signals.

A signal element is:
	> Digital: a voltage pulse of constant amplitude.
	> Analogue: a pulse of constant frequency, phase, and amplitude.

Unipolar - all signal elements have the same algebraic sign, i.e. positive and negative.

Polar - signal elements can have different algebraic signs.

Mark/Space - refers to binary zero.

Data Element - the bits.

Data Rate - the rate at which data are transmitted (measured in bits per second).

NRZ signals, or Non-Return-to-Zero signals, do not return to zero. They use one long pulse
to represent multiple bits, rather than dropping back down to zero after every pulse.

The two versions of this are NRZ-L, which is used by computer terminals, and has high
importance for amplitude and polarity, and NRZI, which is not examinable.

Modulation rate is the rate at which the signal level is changed per second.

Bit duration is the time to transmit one bit.

NRZ techniques make good use of bandwidth, on average one bit per signal element.

However, it is limited to the presence of a DC compinent and has poor sychronisation.

There are two multi-level binary techniques to consider:
	> Bipolar AMI.
	> Pseudoternary.

These both use three signal/voltage levels.

Bipolar AMI uses spaces represented by no line signal, i.e. zero volts, and marks represented
by alternating between positive and negative.

Pseudoternary is very similar, and also not examinable.

Advantages of MB techniques over NRZ:
	> No DC component.
	> Easier synchronisation.
	> Simpler means of error deduction.

Disadvantages over NRZ:
	> Less efficient in terms of bits per signal level.
	> More voltage changes for same bit number.
	> Forces reciever to work harder to interpret.

There are two techniques of biphase encoding to consider:
	> Manchester.
	> Differential Manchester (Not examinable).

In comparison with NRZ techniques:
	> Modulation rate is twice that of NRZ.
	> Synchronisation is provided with each bit interval.
	> No DC component.
	> Better low level error detection.
	> Good performance in presence of noise.

To interpret a digital signal, the reciever must:
	> Be able to read the signal elements (e.g. voltage level).
	> Know when a bit starts and ends (e.g. bit duration, timing).

Successful reception of data depends on:
	> Adequate signal-to-noise ratio - already covered,
	> Sufficient bandwidth - already covered,
	> Sufficiently slow data rate - alredy covered.






































