Data Communications - The Internet
-----------------------------------------------
From pervious discussions on LANs there are a variety of networking technologies available
to facilitate communications between host computers.

For ny given LAN implementation, host computers can only communicate with hosts attached to
the same networking technology.

It is not unreasonable to assume that many organisations may employ a variety of techs.

Historically this can lead to the creation of islands of networks within organisations,
based on differences in frame formats, electrical characteristics, or addressing schemes.

Today there is a need to facilitate communication between any two hosts regardless of LAN.

This is similar to telephone systems which facilitate communication between any two phones.

For example, between a mobile and landline.

THis is known as a univeral service, and is a fundamental networking concept.

With a uiversal service, any user on any host in any part of an organisation can send
messages or data to any other user without any knowledge of the networking tech.

Whilst highly desirable, universal service can be difficult to achieve due to incompatibilities
in networking technologies.

The provision of universal service for host computers requires addressing problems associated
with heterogeneous network techs.

Internetworking introduces a new hardware component, and new software.

Additional hardware is needed to provide a physical interconnection between LANs for the
purpose of routing traffic.

This hardware needs a physical connection to each LAN using the correct NIC.

Additional software is required to address the lack of uniqueness and summary routing
when using MAC addresses, and to introduce a single framing structure for all hosts.

The result of this is a system of connected physical networks, known as an internetwork,
or internet.

THere is no restriction on the size of an internet, but there are many issues to consider.

An example of a small internet could be 4 interconnected LANs.

The hardware component in all this is the router.

It is a special purpose computer used for interconnecting networks.

It is like any other host computer, containing a CPU, RAM, IO, and more.

A single router can be used to connect many LANs.

To provide universal service, the routers must physically pass information between LANs.

As already discussed, passing data directly between different LAN techs is impossible due to
differing frame formats and addressing schemes.

The software component, IP, fixes this. IP stands for internet protocol.

IP addresses the issues by introducing a single, globally unique identification scheme
called IP addressing.

It also introduces a single framing structure, called a "packet" or "datagram", which is
understood by all host computers.

The routers combined with the internet protocol software makes universal access possible.

However, internets are an abstraction. No such network exists in reality, and consequently
they are called virtual networks.


































