Data Communications - LAN Revision
--------------------------------------------

In a local area network, the communications system needs to be managed.

A transmitter cannot just drop a frame when it has one ready to go.

We use MAC (medium access control) to manage a transmitter's access to transmission media.

With bus and star LANS, the access technique is CSMA, or Carrier Sense Multiple Access.

There is a good chance of collisions occuring when two transmitters push a frame out at the
same time.

CSMA is a contention access technique, meaning it can lead to collisions.

However, it also works such that transmitters don't need to request permission centrally
every time they need to transmit.

Collision detection is an addition to CSMA to allow it to detect collisions on a bus LAN.

When we use collision detection, frame size is critically important.

The transmitter needs to be transmitting for a long enough time that if a collision occurs
at the other end of the medium, it can still be detected.

This means 2TP, or two times the propogation delay of a transmitted bit.

If the frame we want to transmit doesn't match up to this length, we pad it.

Star LANS use a central component called a hub, coming in two types, shared medium,
and switched LAN.

Shared Medium Hub star LANs follow the same rules for contention and collisions as a bus.

The switched LAN type can use routing, and allow multiple frames to exist on the LAN at the
same time.

This eliminates contention and improves performance.

Wireless LANs use an access technique called CSMA/CA (collision avoidance instead of detection).

This is because not all stations can see all transmissions, meaning collisions aren't
always detected.

Station 1 sends data to Station 2.

It starts with a request to send, and is met with a clear to send.

When other stations see the clear to send, they must start a timer and not use CSMA during
that period.

A bridge is a piece of technology used to extend an LAN.

They can use frame filtering to make things more efficient, and decide whether to allow a
frame to pass across.

They can eventually allow a frame to exist on both sides of the bridge at the same time.

Bridges connect LANs with similar or different MAC protocols, e.g. IEEE 802.3/802.5 etc.

Bridges facilitate the interconnection of small LANs to create one large LAN.

They contain routing functionality to filter frames and facilitate parallelism.

Collisions are not copied between LANs, which reduces collision domain and improves contention
ratio.



































