Data Communications - Opening
------------------------------------------
This course is concerned with the communications problem: 

	"How can two remote entities communicate with
		   each other effectively and efficiently?"

The module is weighted:
	30% Class Assessment - 15% on either quiz.
	70% Exam.

Recommended Reading:
	Data and Computer Communications by William Stallings
	Data Communications and Networking by Behrouz A. Forouzan*
	Computer Networks by Andrew Tanenbaum

Effective communication is when what is sent is the same as what is recieved.

Efficient communication is when the least amount of resources possible is used.

Sometimes efficiency and effectiveness can work counterintuitively to each other.

Communications is all about moving information from one place to another.

That may be from one person's brain, through their mouth, and into another's ear, or from
another person's brain through the pen in their hand and onto paper.

It can also be about moving data from one computer system to another.

Communication has faced many difficulties in efficiency and effectiveness over time.

First, cave paintings in ancient times, from 40,000 to 10,000 BC.

Then cuneiform scripts, which were inefficient in their 600 character alphabets.

Then onto heiroglyphics, which improved in their shorter alphabet and ability to be written
onto parchment.

Then we had more modern alphabets, and the invention of the printing press.

The printing press allowed for the mass production of the written word.

The issue this ran into was its slowness in travel, as these printed works still needed to be
carried about on horseback.

Following this was the invention of the telegraph, which allowed a message to be tapped out
in a series of dots and dashes, "." and "_", and transmitted along an electrical wire.

This new near-instantaneous communications method was further improved by the introduction
of a standard, a new universal method of encoding the information called "morse code".


Communications Model Components - 5 Component Communications Model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Source: Device that generates data.
Transmitter: Transforms and encodes data.
Transmission System: Physical system connecting source and destination devices.
Reciever: Performs reverse function of transmitter (decodes data).
Destination: Recieves the incoming data.


FOr example, in a telephone communications system, this model might look like:
	Source: Mouth
	Transmitter: Phone
	Transmission System: Signal Tower, Base Station, Phone Network
	Reciever: Other Person's Phone
	Destination: Other Person's Ear

This transformation of sound to radio signals to digital data and back again, and its 
transmission across vast amounts of physical space, must happen in real time.

Data transmission occurs between the transmitter and reciever in this model.

The transmission signal that moves between them is some form of electromagnetic wave or
electrical signal.

In its simplest form, a transmission system is some type of transmission medium which
may be either guided (electric cable, fibre optic), or unguided (EM waves in space).

Successful data transmission depends on two factors: quality of signal and characteristics
of transmission system and medium.

Signal Characteristics Include:
	> Continuous - No breaks or discontinuities
	> Discrete - Contains a finite number of discrete values
	> Periodic - Repeats itself after some fixed time
	> Aperiodic - No repetition of signal pattern

We can use waves to carry data. We can create a sine wave on an electrical cable by altering
the voltage up and down. 

The electricity coming into your house is on a sine wave, an alternating current at 50hz.

A sine wwave has three main characteristics: amplitude, frequency, and phase.

Amplitude measures the height and depth of the peaks and troughs of the wave.

Frequency is the repetitions per second of the wave, measured in hertz.

Phase is the relative position within a cycle of a signal. Measured in degrees or radians.

We can transmit a sine wave over an electrical cable using varying voltages, and then read
the characteristics of that wave back at a destination based on the voltage recieved at
different points in time.

We can change the signal in different ways to represent data, such as high and low voltages
to represent 1s and 0s.

Composite waveforms are made up of multiple waves, which can be reverse engineered into
their component parts.

However, it is less useful to look at signals like this in time domain. It is more useful
to look at them in frequency domain.

Each line in the frequency domain represents a different wave component.

By Fourier Analysis, any signal can be expressed as the sum of a series of sinusoidal
components of different frequencies.

We refer to the component waves that make up a waveform as harmonics.




















