Legal and Professional - Ireland
-----------------------------------------

Ireland was part of a Celtic world, which included Northern Europe.

There was common culture, but no centralised state power.

They were a warrior culture, which valued bravery, and fostered conflict.

Territories were no fixed, and they lived mostly nomadically.

They lived in enclosed timer dwellings in protective stone or earth enclosures.

They had a hierarchical structure: Kings, then Learned Men, then Druids, then slaves at the
bottom.

They had no prisons, and wrongdoing was addressd by monetary compensation or indenturement.

They were relatively wealthy and had a high-protein diet, using salting and smoking to
preserve meat, and making cheese and butter to preserve dairy.

They engaged in farming for grain, cattle, sheep, and dairy, as well as fishing, hunting,
bee-keeping, metal and salt mining, metal working, clothes making, salting of meat and fish,
as well as cheese-making.

They did not have reading or writing - learning was memorised and passed orally from
generation to generation.

Declined with Vercingetorix' defeat by Ceaser in 52 BC.

The legal system was called the Brehon Laws.

They existed in a cryptic language, because it was formed by the fili, or poets, in triads.

This verse format had a question and answer style, such as:
	> "3 foundations of success: a silent mouth, a careful ear, and a fitting action."
	> "3 foundations of law and custom: order, justice, and peace"

A lawyer spent up to 20 full years learning all of these laws verbatim.

Tara, in County Meath, was a ritual center from Neolithic times.

Whoever ruled Tara was considered the High King of Ireland.

A triennial gathering was held in Tara, a feis, attended by people all over the country,
and hosting games, music, and a conference of the brehons.

The brehons were like judges, they had to know and apply the law.

The king was subject to the law, just as anobody else was.

All free men who attended a king's council also defended the realm.

There were around 150 different kingdoms in Ireland, and in return for protection, the local
kings paid tribute to regional or provincial kings, who paid tribute to the high king.

In Ireland, we have several different courts, arranged in a hierarchical structure.

The District Court handles civil matters up to 15,000 and low level criminal matters.

The Circuit Court handles civil matters up to 75,000 and higher level criminal matters.

The High Court deals with civil matters up to any amount of money, as well as the highest
level of criminal matters.

When the High Court sits on Criminal Matters, it is actually called the Central Criminal
Court.

The Supreme Court only hears appeals from other courts on high level matters, and is the
highest court in the country.

Case law, in courts, is precedent.

It operates on a rule based on the Latin expression, stare decisis, meaning stand by the
decision.

When a previous case has had the same or similar facts applied to a rule, subsequent courts
use it to clarify the rule.

Case law, as a result of this, tends to be more reliable, and is not changed without reason.

The law is applied the same way in current cases as it was in similar previous cases.

Doctrine of binding precedent means that ratio decidendi, or reason for deciding, from a 
higher court is binding on a lower court.

If the high court applied the law and made a judgement in a case, then a similar case in
the circuit course has to have it applied in the same way.

This is only binding to the extent that it is relevant for the claims being determined, or in
point.

Obiter dictum are comments made by a judge on determinig a case, but which are not relevant
for the claims being determined in that case, and which are for that reason not binding on
another court.

Obiter dictum isn't binding, but another judge may find it persuasive, and follow judgement
based on it.

A persuasive precedent is where a court, though not bound to, will follow a decision from
another court.

Courts may look further afield for persuasive authority, and therefore decisions from many
other countries with similar systems of law will be relevant.

This system brings a fairness in its consistency, which is essential in a democracy.

It creates certainty, which makes it easier to predict the result of a case.

It saves time, as many cases will be covered by an existing precedent.

Legislation is intended to be clear and unambiguous.

In circumstances where it is not so, there are certain ways to interpret laws.

Ejusdem generis, which means of the same kind, means that when a statute contains general
wording after a list of specifics, then the generality should be read as being limited to 
the items listed.

Expressio unius est exclusio alterius, which means expression of one thing is exclusion
of another, or if one thing is mentioned specifically, others are automatically excluded.

Noscitur a sociis, or it is known from its associates, means that when ambiguous words or
phrases are used, they are given meaning from surrounding words.

The rule of lenity says that criminal statures should be construed narrowly.

There are many other approaches:
	> Literal Approach - Words given plain meaning except where absurd result.
	> Golden Rule - Current Fashion, plain meaning except where absurd result.
	> Mischief Rule - Look beyond wording to identify meaning and intent.
	> Purposive Approach - interpret legislation to keep within its purpose.

Over the years after WW2, many European countries formed coalitions and councils to prevent
further conflict:
	> 1952 - Coal and Steel Comm.
	> 1993 - EU established
	> EU consists of 3 communities - EC, ECSC, and Euratom.

EU institutions consist of Council of Ministers, Commission, European Parlaiment, Count of
Justice and Auditors.

European law is found principally on the EC Treaties, in secondary EC legislation, and in
rulings from the European Court of Justice.

Civilian systems of law are based on principle, and when addressing a problem, assess what
to do in light of the legal principle that applies.

Common law systems are based on precedent and assess a problem by examining the decisions
that previous courts reached in addressing analogous problems.

There are many legal systems that are a mix of the two, such as the Scottish legal system.

Public law, including local government and constitutional law, criminal law, and these
regulate the activity of the state vis a vis the private citizen.

Private law refers to the body of law, which regulates the activities of individuals,
often called black letter law, and includes family law, law of succession, contract law,
tort law, and law of property.



















