Legal and Professional - World Law
---------------------------------------------------
Many countries in the world operate on Common Law or some similar system.

These are mostly countries who have been at some point colonized by the English or Normans.

Other countries have different systems, such as France, who's judges are more proactive.

Ireland's Law is based on the Irish constitution, Bunreacht na hÉireann. This is its primary
source.

Article 50 in the Constitution says essentially that any laws in effect before the
constitution will continue to be in effect as long as they aren't inconsistent with it, until
they are repealed or amended by the Oireachtas.

Ireland moved from Celtic and Brehon Laws, to Brehon and Christian Laws, then, when the 
English arrived, struggled against the English effort to replace Brehon with English Law.

Finally, by the 3rd Millenium, Ireland has moved to a more globalised legal system.

When Brehon Law was in effect, the Irish had no writing system, and so nothing was written
down, except for by Christian monks in their monasteries.

In England, things moved from Celtic Laws to Roman Rule, before Rome collapsed, leading to
the Dark Ages, and Viking Rule.

This evolved into Norman Feudal Law when the Norman's took over, which then evolved into the
Common Legal system, and then underwent the same sort of globalisation as Ireland.

When Rome collapsed, leaving most of Europe in the Dark Ages, Ireland has never been taken
by the Romans, and so the Christian Monks in Ireland left for Europe to reintroduce learning.

Nowadays we have a lot of globalised law. The European Union is a large factor in this.

Any entity that wishes to business with or in Europe abides by EU law.

Sources of Irish Law come from Common Law, Legislature, Constitution, and Europe.

Any law that parlaiment attempts to pass that conflicts with the constitution is not
allowed to stand, and can be contested as unconstitutional.

In the last few decades we have had the EU as a source of law as well.

After the Romans left England, England was invaded by the Angles and the Saxons.

Invader's laws brought varied concepts around the country, which were often quite crude,
such as trials by combat, ordeal, immersion, or compurgation.

Tithing was a tool used to force communities to police themselves. If somebody fled their
sentence, their next of kin would serve their sentence, whether that been fine or death etc.

William the Conquerer came in with the Normans, and ruled through land ownership.

He owned all of England as the King, and granted large segments to his vassals, such as
barons or lords or dukes, etc.

This was in return for service, fealty, and homage. They had to obey and serve the King.

Otherwise, their land was forfeit.

The King could reassign their land only if they died mysteriously, and the Coroner
role was established to investigate this.

Curia Regis was the King's Court, who helped with legistlative, administrative, and judicial
processes.

They evolved into the court system, and specialised through divisions.

Local courts also existed in the feudal system.

Sheriffs supervised Manorial Courts, and Justices of Peace supervised Local Courts.

Soldiers assisted sheriffs and justices, and enforcement by tithing continued.

The population was divided into groups of 10, and if a serious offence was committed by one,
all the rest were published.

William the Conquerer made new laws and decrees and the courts function was to enforce
existing law to achieve uniformity.

Stare Decisis, or precedent, was the idea that when a matter was decided upon in the King's
court, all similar future cases would be decided the same way.

Therefore, in common law, sentences are often found in previous decisions of judges rather
than in local customs.

Parlaiment came from the idea of Parlay, when the King called meetings of his vassals
to present petitions, vote for money transfers, etc.

A group of barons in 1215 forced King John to sign a document, the Magna Carta.

This curtailed the powers of the King. He had to recognise rights and liberties for the 
lords and barons, of the church, and of free men (land owners).

This led to the introduction of juries: no freeman was to be convicted by any crime except
for by a jury of his peers.

City and Borough representatives were, from 1265, called to parlaiment (commons).

Lords and the Commons met seperately, which led to the House of Lords and the House of
Commons.













