Legal and Professional - Ethics 2
---------------------------------------------------

Aristotle believed that the purpose of man is to achieve happiness.

He believed this was to be achieved by the practice of virtue and goodness in life.

Another moral framework is Divine Command Theory.

Three great monotheistic religions emerged from the Middle East, from the Torah.

Within the morality of these religions, good actions align with God's will, and bad ones are
those against the will of God.

According to these religions, Holy Books are the documentation of God's will, and should be
used as moral decision-making guides.

According to Divine Command Theory, we owe obedience to our Creator. God is all-knowing and
all-good, and is the ultimate authority.

There is a pretty strong case against Divine Command Theory though.

Different holy books disagree and contradict each other.

Not everybody follows the same religion, and even within one religion, there are different
groups and sects of followers, e.g. Catholics, Protestants, and Orthodox Christians.

Some people may not believe in any God at all.

Some moral problems are not addressed at all in scripture, especially modern ones.

If God is all good, then he is not all powerful, and if God is all powerful, he is not all good.

"Goodness" in divine command is often based more on obedience than reason.

Ethical Egoism is another moral philosophy, based on being practical.

According to this, we are inclined to do what is best for ourselves, and it is best to let
others take care of themselves, as we can't know what is best for them.

It says that good deeds often bring more harm than good, and dependence on charity brings
a loss of self-esteem.

According to ethical egoism, the communtiy can benefit when individuals put their well-being
first, e.g. successgul entrepreneurs may get rich, but will also create jobs and wealth.

Other moral principles are rooted in self-interest here.

Ethical Egoism says you should only ever help someone else if it helps you yourself.

However, the issue with Ethical Egoism is that it sucks a whole bunch.

It's usually not that hard to know what is good for, or might help, someone else.

The idea that a good deed usually does more harm than good is completely ridiculous.

Most people share the same core values, so it isn't all that hard to know how to help.

Charity doesn't usually lead to dependence, e.g. a scholarship for a bright student.

Even if someone is dependent on charity, it is more likely because they have to be than
that they want to be.

A completely self-interested focus also leads to blatantly immoral acts, such as not
saving a drowning person in order to avoid wetting my shirt.

People who take the good of others into account lead happier, more connected lives.

We reject ethocal egoism as a workable ethical theory.

A different, less insane framework is Kantianism.

Kantianism allows only universal rules that can be rationalized.

Good Will is identified as the desire to do the right thing.

Kant asks, "What is always good without qualification?".

The only thing in the world that Kant found to lack qualification to be good, is Good Will,
even if the end result is not achieved.

Reason should cultivate desire to do the right thing.

It operates with Dutifulness, deontological ethics, in that our will should be grounded in
a conception of moral rules.

It says "Act only from moral rules that you can at the same time will to be universal moral
laws".

For example, can a person in dire straits make a promise with the intention of breaking it
later?

According to Kantianism, a moral rule must be universal. If the answer above was "yes", then
anyone would be able to break any promise, defeating the purpose of them, and so the rule
becomes a contradiction, and the answer is "no".

This is Kantianism's first formulation.

The second formulation says "treat both yourself and others as ends in themselves, and never
only as a means to an end".

This is usually an easier formation to work with than the first one.

Consider a scenario:
	Mary is a single mother, and works full time. She takes two evening courses, but
	does not have time to write the final report for her history class. She instead
	purchases a report and submits it as her own work.

According to first formulation, Mary wants credit for the plagiarized report. If the rule
for this was universal, reports would no longer be a gradable, creditable assignment, and
lecturers could no longer assign or give credit for them.

According to second formulation, Mary attempted to decieve the lecturer, and treated them
as a means to an end, and so what she did was wrong.

However, it is often difficult to characterize an act universally.

Utilitarianism says that an action is good if it benefits someone, and bad if it harms
someone.

It say that an action is right or wrong to the extent that it increases or decreases
the total happiness of the affected parties.

It is a consequentialist theory, as the moral of an action has nothing to do with intent,
just the consequences.

This is known as act utilitarianism.

Rule utilitarianism is the idea that we should adopt moral rules which, if followed by
everyone, cause the greatest increase in total happiness.

Compared to act utilitarianism, this is easier to perform utilitarian calculus with.

Not ever moral decision will require it, and the rules can survive exceptional situations.

The case against it is clear enough too though.

Utilitarianism, by definition, requires some quantification of human life in order to do
their sums, e.g. ten divorces result from X new law.

As a wise person once said, "What could equal the value of a human soul?".






































