Legal and Professional Studies - GDPR 2
----------------------------------------------------

THe principles of Article 5.1 state that personal data must be:
	> Processed lawfully, fairly, and transparently.
	> Can only be collected for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes.
	> Adequate, relevant, and limited to what is necessary for processing.
	> Accurate and kept up to date.
	> Kept in a form such that the data subject can be identified only for as long
	  as is necessary for processing.
	> Processed in a manner that ensures its security.

GDPR is applicable to organisations within and outwith the EU.

It potentially protects information of all natural persons, whatever their nationality or
residence.

Personal data is: information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person, or
a data subject.

An identifiable person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular
by reference to an identifier such as a name, ID number, location data, or factors
relting to physical, physiological, genetic, mental, or economic identity of that person.

The extended list of identifiable characteristics means that a great deal of anonymised
data may no longer be suitable for distribution or sharing in public.

Organisations that distribute anonymised data need to carefully assess whether the data
can be linked, directly or indirectly, to the data subject.

Data Subjects have a number of rights in regard to their data, which are balanced against
the right to the free flow of data to support "the pursuit of economic activities".

Organisations must ensure that they know what data they collect, and how they use data.

Restrictive rules exist on what can be done without specific consent.

A data subject can seek judicial remedies against Data Controllers and Data Processors.

They also have the right to seek compensation for damages arising from any breaches.

Data controllers are given a vested interest in ensuring the security of any personal data
they pass to a processor.

Data controllers generally need data subjects' consent to process their data.

There are limited circumstances where they do not, revolving around legal requirements,
or where consent is provided through a contract with a third party.

Consent must be clear and unambiguous before processing personal data.

Silence, pre-ticked boxes, and inactivity, cannot be considered consent.

Organisations need parental permission for this with children under age 16.

Consent is possible with a check box, but the consent document must be laid out in simple
terms.

Consent can also be withdrawn at any time, and the data controller must provide a method
that is as easy to withdraw consent as to give it.

Data subjects have the right to be forgotten. This means they have the right to have their
data erased under a number of circumstances, which must also occur if they withdraw
consent for all processing for which the data is held.

Data controllers must take "reasonable steps" to erase any of the data subject's data that
might be public, such as in news articles, or databases.

The data commisioner will want to see that all appropriate technical and procedural
measures to erase the data have been employed.

Data subjects can request a copy of any personal data held on them, and can also request
that this information is transmitted to another data controller. 

It must be structured in a commonly used and machine-readable format.

Some organisations will already have appropriate contact with other organisations to
facilitate the transfer of data, and these contacts can be leveraged to streamline the process.

Article 6 expands on how the data subject must have given consent, or processing is
necessary for certain tasks, majority, require consideration of the data subjects' interests.

This is permissible for the purposes of legitimate interests pursued by the controller or
by a third party, except where such interests are overriden by the interests or
fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject which require protection of personal
data, in particular when the data subject is a child.

Processing certain special categories of data, like ethnicity and sexual orientation,
is explicitly forbidden, except in very specific circumstances.

Data can only be retained for limited periods, which should be clear to the data subject
at the point at which they consent.

This is not a hard and fast rule, as some data could be held effectively indefinitely.

While holding data, confidentiality and integrity must be secured.

This includes against accidental loss, destruction, or damage.

Should be an extremely high priority for every organisation, for example due to
compulsory data breach reporting.

GDPR is itended to be a single scheme across the EU, to maintain common market.

EU Data Protection Board, EDPB, was creted to ensure that laws remain relatively consistent
and with minimal impact on commerce.

Member states will have Data Protection Authorities, intended to reduce bureacratic load
for organisations dealing with data protection.

Organisations will deal with the DPA in their primary jurisdiction. This will cover all
cross-border intra-EU data processing.

Data controllers must retain record of its data processing activities. Types of data being
being processed, where, how, and why it is processed.

Data processors are also required to keep a record of all processing carried out on
behalf of the data controller.

Records can be called upon by the Data Protection Authority.

Data controllers must ensure that Data Protection Impact Assessments are a part of their
risk assessment process regarding personal data.

A set of DPIA can cover a set of similar processing operations with comparable risks.




























