Legal and Professional - Ethics
---------------------------------------

There are many sources of ethical schools of thought from throughout human history.

The law does not always reflect what is most ethical, and ethics does not always reflect
what is most legal.

There are several moral frameworks on which people's ethics are based.

These include:
	> Relativism
	> Divine Command
	> Kantianism
	> Social Contract

Most people share the core values of happiness, life, and ability to accomplish goals.

There are two ways to approach the world with these values: the selfish, where everyone 
cares only about themselves, and the ethical, where everyone respects others.

Society is an association of people under an organised system of rules.

Morality is society's rules of conduct, what people should/shouldn't do in scenarios.

Ethics are a rational examinaion of morality, and an evaluation of people's behaviour.

In a theoretical scenario, the police set up a camera system to track drivers, which can
detect the driver's face, their speed, and license plate, used to issue fines to speeders.

The number of speeding cases decreases, but the Serious Crimes division asks for the info
collected by the cameras, whih is then used to arrest 5 terrorists.

Did they do anything wrong? Probably. Taxes paid for those cameras, and they went up for the
purpose of tracking speeding. They wouldn't have been installed to track people otherwise.

The division benefitted from this, as they arrested the terrorists, but everyone else is 
harmed by the action, as trust in the police is diminished, reducing their effectiveness.

Another scenario, more relevant to us: You are a senior software engineer with a start-up
company developing a product to digitise the paperwork nurses use to track patients.

Your sales force has led hospitals to believe this will be ready next week.

Unfortunately, the product still has a few minor bugs, and the testing team says it'll be
at least a month before they can confirm there's nothing catastrophic.

You also have caught wind that a well-established company intends to release similar
software in the next while.

Ethics only counts in situations in which you have a choice, and if the choice is a moral one.

Under relativism, there is no universal right and wrong, everything is relative.

Each person decides what the meaning is of right and wrong for themselves.

Under this, well-meaning and intelligent people can disagree on moral issues, and
ethical debates end up disagreeable and pointless.

There are cases for cultural relativism as well, wherein certain cultures have practices
that are looked on with disgust by others.

There is also a case against it. Some cultures will respond to drought by constructing
an aqueduct, and some will respond with a sacrifice to the rain gods.

Simply because some cultural practices are acceptable, does not mean they all are.



























