Legal and Professional Studies - Copyright 2
--------------------------------------------------

Protection provided is a negative right.

An infringement on a copyright can be on a whole or on part of a work.

Protection provided prevents others from copying the work, issuing copies to the public,
displaying or broadcasting it in public, making an adaption of the work, or many others.

Copyright owners on software can prevent others from temporarily or permanently copying
the program, translating, adapting, or altering it, or putting into circulation a device
to facilitate the unauthorized removal of any protective devices.

Moral rights with copyright include the right to be identified as the author or director
of the work, the right to object to derogatory treatment of the work, and the right not
to have a work falsely attributed to them.

Moral rights are concerned with protecting the personality and reputation of authors.

The right to be idetified must be asserted, i.e. the author must indicate their wish, and
give notice.

The duration of a copyright is generally the lifetime of the author, plus 70 years.

For industrially produced artistic works, protection usually lasts 25 years.

Outside the EU, terms of protection are reciprocal to those afforded by the country of origin.

E.g. Ireland provides French authors with the same protections they give Irish authors.

A database is usually defined as a collection of data or other material that is arranged
in a systematic or methodical way so that the items are individually accessible.

Copyright protection covers any forms of database that fall within the definition, not
just computer-based ones.

For copyright protection, the database must have originality in the selection or arrangement
of contents.

Many modern databases may require huge investment, however, may still lack originality to
gain adequate copyright protection.

A special additional right - to protect databases, particularly where they lack originality,
is called Sui Generis.

The database must be the result of substantial investment.

No registration is required, and it commences when in a recorded form.

The duration is 15 years, from creation or publication.

It must be perpetual in nature, recommencing when a database is substantially updated.

Rights include control extraction and re-utilization of contents, and on infringement,
extraction or reutilization of a substantial part.

Trademarks are a marking of goods to indentify their crafter, and can be traced back to
ancient times.

Generally they don't come about by registration, and a mere registration of a company
name or domain name is no guarantee that you can trade using the name.

A disadvantage of unregistered use is that is is much more difficult to prevent
competitors from appropriating the goodwill of the mark.

You must resort to the common law and to a legal action known as "passing off", which
protects the reputation associated with products and services.

Passing off also applies to a competitor attempting to confuse by adopting a similar package.

A third party cannot lawfully pass itself or its goods or services off as being yours.

A trademark can be registered by filing an application at the Irish Patent Office.

Someone given the trademark then has an exclusive right to use of the mark in the territory
in which the mark is registered.

Exclusive rights to use the trade mark for the goods or services for which a trademark is
registered is called monopoly provided.

A major part of the value attributed to trade marks is due to their association with
goodwill for a brand.

The brand helps customers and traders recognise a business and identify quality of goods.

Brands are central to marketing programs, and it is a trademark that protects the most
distinctive elements that make up the market identity element of many brands.

Registering their name as a trademark, they can control the way their reputation is used
to endorse products in the market.

A trademark is first registered for a 10 year period, and then renewed every 10 years for
a fee.

Almost anything can be a trademark - words, shapes, logos, combinations, names, colors,
jingles, smells, etc.
































