Legal and Professional Studies - GDPR and Data Protection
---------------------------------------------------------------

The Data Protection Directive in 1995 was a reset for European Data Protection laws.

All member states were obliged to align with it and thereby improve protections for personal
data.

Simultaneously, it reduced the burdens impeding the free flow of data through the EU.

It established rules for transporting data outside of the EU, e.g. US-EU Safe Harbour.

This asserted that US data protection laws were sufficient for the protection of personal
date originating in the EU, as long as the US recipient observed a set of data protection
principles.

It was found to be in breach of the DPD in 2015, but supported considerable business
activity for 15 years.

The 2003 Data Protection Act enacted the requirements of the DPD.

It was founded on 8 principles:
	> Obtain and process information fairly.
	> Data must be kept for a specified, lawful purpose.
	> Data should be used and disclosed only for the specified purpose.
	> The data must be kept safe and secure.
	> The data must be kept accurate, up-to-date, and complete.
	> The data must be relevant, adequate, but not excessive.
	> The data must be retained for no longer than necessary.
	> A copy of the data must be made available to the data subject on request.

These principles clearly laid out the general aims of the ct, which made it reasonably simple
to determine whether an organisaton was meeting obligations.

There was some complexity in the broader act, however, and repeated amendments and updates
meant that it continued to grow and become more unwieldy as time went on.

Across the EU, other, similar legislation was enacted, but through a combination of time and
varying national interests, no two national laws were sufficiently similar for an organisation
to be compliant both in its home country and all other EU member states.

The free flow of information was effectively inhibited because the different regulatory
environments clashed on matters of detail.

Businesses and governments alike were required to arrange processed specific to an
increasing array of scenarios.

GDPR, or the General Data Protection Regulation, came in in 2018.

It was a law that entered into force across the whole of the EU simultaneously.

It was not dependent on intepretation by local government, courts, or authorities.

Because of the legal weight of the regulation, they typically take longer to pass through
the legislative process, but also ensure greater consistency across the EU.

A data controller is a natural or legal person, public authority, agency, or other body,
which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of processing
personal data.

A data processor is a natural or legal person, public authority, agency, or other body,
which process personal data on behalf of the controller.

A data subject is "an identified or indentifiable natural person".

There is no restriction on their nationality, or place of residence, so a data subject
can be from anywhere in the world.

Equally, however, a data subect has to be a person. A corporation or other entity cannot
be a data subject, and information on those subjects has no protection under the regulation.

Personal data means any information relating to an indentified or identifiable natural
person, one who can be identified directly or indirectly by reference to an identifier.

These identifiers can include a name, ID number, location data, online identifier, or to
one or more factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic,
cultural, or social identity of that natural person.






























