Legal and Professional - More on Privacy
-------------------------------------------------

Data processors must provide "sufficient guarantees to implement appropriate technical
and organisational measures" to comply with GDPR.

Requirement moves down the supply chain, DP cannot engage a second DP without DS' explicit
authorisation.

Also, 2nd DP has to supply the same guarantees.

Contractual arrangements must be reviewed and updated. Ensure that responsibilities and
liabilities between DC and DP are defined.

Must document responsibilities to ensure no confusion, and may have to accept that the
increased risk levels and requirements for data protection measures may impact service costs.

Certifications to international standards, like ISO 27001 are recognised as effective to
demonstrate appropriate technical and organisational measures have been implemented.

A data protection officer is required if:
	> Data is processed by a public authority or body.
	> Core activities consist of processing operations requiring regular and systematic
	  monitoring of data subjects on a large scale.
	> Activities consist of processing large quantities of special categories of data.

SOme companies will appoint a DPO even if not required, as it's possible that an
organisation's business may suddenly shift in such a way that they now require one.

Requirements imposed by the GDPR makes the appointment of an appropriately qualified person
to take this role as a sensible risk-containment step.

A group of controllers or processors may share a single DPO as long as they are "easily
accessible from each establishment".

A DPO can be employed under a service contract, and must be qualified for the role on the
basis of expert knowledge of data protection law and practices.

DPO duties include ensuring that the organisation complies with GDPR:
	> Offering advice, monitoring DPIAs.
	> Being immediate contact for the DPA.
	> Name and contact details must be published by the organisation.

DPOs need to be more than legal experts - they need qualifications to hande the operational
requirement to demonstrate appropriate organisational and administrative measures.

Under the DP Directive, data breaches often happened without the DPAs being informed,
nor affected DSs.

GDPR mandates informing both parties, with limited exceptions.

Best practie is to ensure that there are processes in place to make these notifications
in the event of a data breach.

Reports must be made within 72 hours of the DC becoming aware of the breach.


Notification requires a specific format - describing the measures being taken to
address the breach, etc.

Where high risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects are present, DSs must be
contacted "without undue delay".

It is not necessary if appropriate protective measures are in place to eliminate danger to
DSs, like encryption.

Incident response and breach reporting processes should be expanded enough to cover all
potential cyber breaches.

Continual testing and maintenance of these processes will be important to ensure that
the 72 hour deadline is met.

ALong with appropriate actions to protect data subjects' rights.

ISO27001 management systems cover this.

A data breach should be on the Board's risk register, given potential fines and the rights
of DSs to bring cases and claim compensation.

The prevalence and effectiveness of cyber crime.

DC will be accountable for failures of DCs, hence the board must ensure that any DP is
operating in accordance with the regulations, regardless of their jurisdiction.

Besides the DPO, other roles will need a level of familiarity with the requirements of the
GDPR.

THhis includes most HR staff, as well as middle and senior management in virtually any
function dealing with personal data being processed, stored, or transmitted by the org.

Staff awareness training should support the more focused training applied to managers.

DC/DP should already be encrypting mobile devices.

Consideration should be given to extending encryption to cover all of the data collection,
processing, and storage processes.

For encryption standards, follow best practice, e.g. FIPS 140-compliant solutions.

Ensuring that your solutions meet this standard will not only protect personal data in line
with the regulation's requirements, it may also allow you to access new markets/clients.

Encryption beyond storage of personal data may also be valuable or necessary.

Reasons include establishing secure connections where personal data will be transmitted.

Secure Sockets Layer, or SSL encryption is no longer considered secure.

Transport Layer Security 1.2 or higher is really the new minimum.

GDPR requires that protections are not undermined by the transfer of data abroad.

US-EU Safe Harbour Framework: US organisations could attest that they adhered to 7 principles
and 15 FAQs to meet the requirements of the DPD.

THis would then qualify them for certification under the framework and trouble-free
access to the European market as a data processor.

This was dismantled in 2015.

The US-EU Privacy Shield replaced Safe Harbour. Personal data exchanged under the auspices
of this agreement will be governed by the GDPR.

EU Commission may also recognise some countries or international organisations as providing
adequate protection for personal data.

A list of these will be published and maintained, including noting where recognition has
been removed.

DCs/DPs can transfer data to those listed without any further authorisation or safeguards
beyond those normally required under GDPR.

DCs/DPs can transfer data if they put in place legally binding and enforceable arrangements
to protect the rights of EU DSs.

Model binding corporate rules approved by the DPA is one such means.

They can also develop their own binding corporate rules to secure data when transferiing
to 3rd countries.

GDPR is very clear on what these rules must cover.

Also, they must be approved by the DPA.

Codes of conduct and certifications to international standards are also means by which
DCs/DPs may be able to identify organisatons that will provide appropriate safeguards.

GDPR encourages DPAs to draw up codes of conduct and encourage use of data protection
certifications.

As DCs/DPs are accountable for data they are processing, any agreement to transger that
data to a third party, outside the arrangements identified in GDPR, will be illegal.

IMportant to consider when choosing cloud providers.

Highest penalties exist for bad practice in international transfers.




































