Legal and Professional Issues - Privacy & GDPR
-----------------------------------------------------

"The Right to Privacy" was an article published by Harvard Law Review in 1890.

The central thrust of the article is that common law should protect the idea of privacy.

It referred to Mr. Justice Cooley, who had used the phrase "right to be left alone" 2 years
earlier.

Ireland has limited recognition of privacy in the Constitution:
	> "State guarantees in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by its laws
	   to defend nd vindicate the personal rights of the citizen".
	> "State pledges itself to guard with special care the Institution of Marriage, on
	   which the Family is founded, and to protect against its attack".
	> "The dwelling of every citizen is inviolable and shall not be forcibly entered
	   save in accordance with the law".

Privacy and freedom of expression are two fundamental rights, and in media cases, are often
also in direct conflict.

The theoretical problem of the "balancing of rights" is a pressing practical issue for
editors as well as media lawyers.

The concept of data protection, as it is used today, is very modern.

Digitally stored databases and records keep track of more information about us than anything
before.

Digital records are intangible, with no physical weight or volume, and can be lost or stolen
without indication.

Such a loss could represent an enormous amount of value.

Earliest information protection practices were driven by professions rather than the law.

The lawyer-client privelege became a contract between a lawyer and client over the centuries.

This allowed the lawyer to represent their clients' interests without the client fearing
legal repercussions.

Medical records and a doctor's confidentiality were similarly established.

Even though a court could force those records to be handed over, the medical profession
keeps them relatively safe otherwise.

These practices ensred specific silos of personal information were protected according to the
interests of the business.

Where a business value existed, then information was protected.

Moving from paper to electronics meant more varied and powerful methods for manipulating
personal information.

This means greater risks in terms of data security.

Political campaigns have used increasing volues of data to better target key demographics,
define policy, and manage candicates' images.

Campaigns in America terget states based on historical notions of which states were "Swing",
i.e. could go either way and budget realities.

Campaigns also use data to construct predictive models to make targeting campaign comms more
efficient and to support borader campaign strategies.

These predictive models result in three categories for predictive scores for each citizen
in the voter database: behaviour scores, support scores, and responsiveness scores.

Identity theft has become a significant problem that has only become a greater threat with
the greater volume of information that is available.

The European Convention on Human Rights in 1953 introduced several new privacy laws to Europe.
	> "Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and
	   his correspondence."
	> "There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this
	   right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a
	   democratic society in the interests of national security."

The Council of Europe, 1981, introduced Treaty 108, the Convention for the Protection of
Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data.

Established standards to ensure the free flow of information throughout EU member countries
without infringing personal privacy.

The 1988 Data Protection Act rflected the minimunstandards specified in that convention.

It wasn't rigorous in 1988. Requirements for the protection of personal data were considerably
less urgent than today.

The power and availability of computers exploded in the 80s and 90s, and EU Member States'
data protection laws diverged, thus impeding data flows through the EU, and business too.




























