Legal and Professional - Intellectual Property Law
-------------------------------------------------------------

IP rights, or IPR, are acquired for intellectual creations.

They are national rights, and can be either registered or unregistered.

There are many ways in which IP laws are implemented and in which IP is protected.

These include:
	- Registered:
		> Patents
		> Trade Marks
		> Registered Designs
		> Domain Names
	- Unregistered:
		> Copyright
		> Unregistered Trade Marks
		> Unregistered Design Rights
		> Confidential Information

The IP system is implemented with two tiers:
	> A national patent office is responsible for patents, TMs, and registered designs.
	> National courts are the forum in which IPR infringements are enforced.

There is no registration required for confidential information.

It must be protected by agreement to keep the informaton confidential.

It covers anything that has the necessary quality of confidence about it.

The information also must not be public domain.

For a duty of confidence:
	> Info must be communicated.
	> Confidant must reasonably know that disclosure is made in confidence.

For breach of confidence:
	> There must be a risk of damage from the information being used.
	> Or disclosed in an unauthorized way.

Generally the idea of confidential info is used to protect un-patentable technical and
commercial information.

This includes minor details of a manufacturing process that are essential for a commercial
product to be obtained.

For example, tolerances involved in the manufacture of an article, and the detailed
procedures of a machine.

Companies should ensure adequate steps to keep details secret, and make sure everyone in the
organization knows this.

When negotiating a transfer of technology, it is important not to disclose know-how until it
is covered b a written agreement.

Once published, it is not reasonable to expect anyone to pay for it.

The existence of know-how is a useful back-up in case a patent is granted, since it still
enables royalties to be charged, even if at a reduced rate.

If a binding know-how agreement is broken by unauthorized use of the information or by 
unauthorized disclosure, it is possible to bring a legal action for breach of contract.

Verbal disclosure can be difficult to prove, common for confidential information to be
distributed on media marked as such.

A non-disclosure agreement, or NDA, or confidentiality agreement, should be signed by the
recieving party prior to disclosure.

Breach of confidentiality is typically a breach of contract and dealt with as such by
courts.

A patent is a monopoly right on an invention.

It covers how things work, what they do, how they do it, what they are made from, or how
they are made.

It can cover not only such things as an electrical circuit, a chemical product, or a control
system, but also a small household item such as a can opener.

It also covers processes such as new or improved process of making a new material, or a new
method of navigation.

In certain situations, it can also cover software-based inventions.






































