Legal and Professional Issues - Copyright
-------------------------------------------------------

Copyright dates back to Ancient Greek and Rome.

Brehon Law also recognized copyright: "to every cow it's calf, to every book it's copy".

In the 15th century, the printing press brought a new ability to print large quantities
of books and politcal pamphlets.

This brought with it the new issue of piracy (not the yargh type, that was already there).

This then lead on to the introduction of copyright protection.

In the UK, the King recognized the royal prerogative to:
	> Regulate the book trade.
	> Protect printers against privacy.
	> To control what was printed.

In 1709, the statute of Anne was the first UK act to introduce copyright for books and
other writings.

An author is the owner of a copyright, and provided a fixed term protection.

The works protected under copyright include:
	> Original literary, dramatic, musical, and artistic works.
	> PUblished editions of work, sound recordings, films, and broadcasts.
	> Computer programs and their preparatory materials.
	> Operating manuals, instruction booklets, and publicity material.

Registration is not required, although carefully signed and dated evidence should be kept
of the original work.

Protection exits automatically, if the work has been fixed in some manner.
	> This includes in a computer-readable medium.

The work must be original, which is a relatively low threshold, and not copied.

Although some countries require that copyrighted works are marked with the international ©
symbol, followed by the owner and year of publication.

However, this isn't mandatory in the UK, Ireland, and most other European countries.

Copyright can be bought, sold, transferred, and licensed.

Copyright owners can choose to license their works for use to others, while retaining
their own ownership over the core copyrights themselves.

There are no copyrights for names, slogans, or phrases/jingles.

Copyrights can protect the expression of an idea, but not the idea itself.















































