Legal and Professional - Still GDPR
------------------------------------------

The first step towards GDPR compliance will be a data audit for an organisaton, identifying
the personal data they already hold, who it has been shared with, and where it is now held,
and to determine what must be done with that data in order to comply with the GDPR.

This data audit process will necessarily include reviewing existing processes for gathering
personal data.

This ensures there are clearly identified business and legal grounds for that collection,
and ensures that all related processes will comply with the new regulation.

Depending on the nature of the business, this could be a broad exercise.

Showing points of egress and ingress of data is a lot.

Organisations also need to be clearabout the info assets that actually constitute personal
data.

Organisations must also consider where data resides physically. If a cloud solution is
utilised, where is the supplier based? 

If they are outside the EU, do their services meet the regulation's requirements?

This includes physically and paper records that are kept by an organisation.

They could additionally carry out a DPIA in relation to info already collected.

GDPR requires a lot of documentation.

In addition to the explicit and implicit requirements for specific records, you should
also ensure you have documented how you comply with the GDPR.

This is so that you have some evidence to support your claims if the supervisory authority
has any cause to investigate.

If you suffer a data breach, for instance, being able to show that you have an audit trail
showing that you notified them and any affected data subjects within the required
timeframes, and that you have taken all the appropriate steps to mitigate the impact.

This will minimise the chance you will be hit by a crippling fine.

There are different documentation requirements for DPs and DCs, but the onus will
generally be on the controller.

This is due to their likeliness to suffer the consequences regardless of who is at fault.

If you are a controller with a number of processing functions outsourced, it's worth
gaining assurances that these functions are appropriately documented.

Important documents to have include:
	> Statements of the informaton collected and process, and the purpose.
	> Records of consent from data subjects or their holder of parental responsibility.
	> Records of processing activities under your responsibility.
	> Documented processes for protecting personal data (Info security policy etc.)

Punishments for breaches can include the following:
	> 20 million Euros fine.
	> 4% of global annual turnover.
	> Whichever is greater of the two.

Certification bodies involved in certification schemes can be fined if they are found to
be shirking their responsibilities.

As such, it's possible for a single breach to affect a large number of organisations:
	> The Controller
	> The Processor(s)
	> The Certification Body that approved them.

Because these admin penalties can be applied so broadly, it is very important to understand
what your obligations and exposure are.

You should be certain to consult a legal expert if you are concerned that you might not be
in compliance with the law.

While fines from other regulators are unlikely to match those given out by GDPR, the
compounding of other punitive measures can be significant.

Reputational damage can bring loss of clients, suppliers, partners, customers, etc.

Ensuring that your organisation supports compliance with the regulation from the very top
will be critical to meeting your obligations.

It would be difficult to implement all of the necessary measures without that level of
support.

