HUman Computer Interaction - Accessibility
--------------------------------------------------

Universal Design is the design and composition of an environment so that it can be
accessed, understood, and used, to the greatest possible extent, by all people, regardless
of age, size, or disability.

In ome countries, universal design is called "design for all" or "inclusive design".

Ireland is the only country which contains a definition of Universal Design in legislation.

UD is closely related to other design processes, such as UC design and UX/CX.

The meet the needs of the widest range of consumers, we must consider the needs of diverse
user groups.

Oversample the "tails" on the distribution curve when conducting user research and testing.

The more our buildings and places are design to accomodate the widest range of people, the
more they work for everyone.

UD places diversity at the heart of the design process, so that buildings and environments
can be used to meet the need of all people.

For any service to be inclusive, the tech, environment, and products used, must all work
together.

UD is not a euphemism for accessibility.

Accessibility features such as ramps and lifts are "potent symbols of seperateness".

UD promotes equality of access for all people.

UD results in better designs for everyone, and the planet.

UD is better design, and works first time for more people while being comfy and easy to use.

Accessibility is the general term used to describe the degree to which a product is
accessible by as many people as possible.

It also relates to "ability to access", the funcitonality and possible beneThe fit of some
system or entity.

The goals of HCI are about allowing users to carry out tasks:
	> Safely
	> Effectively
	> Efficiently
	> Ejoyably

How do we improve interfaces:
	> Change attitude of software pros who think you can "just slap an interface on".
	> Draw on accumulating body of knowledge regarding HCI interface design.
	> Integrate UI design methods and tech into software dev methodologies.

We need to know the user, and any:
	> Physical Abilities
	> Cognitivie Abilities
	> Personality Differences
	> Skill Difference
	> Cultural Diversity
	> Motivation
	> Special Needs

An ageing user might suffer impairments due to a progressing age. These include: memory,
mobility, vision, and hearing.

As an interface desinger, You might decide to simplify screen layouts, provide simple linear
search spaces, and increase the size of fonts and controls, among other things.

Ability varies between and within individuals, and there is often compensation in another.

Most people have anough abilities in reserve to adapt to changes.

There is some interaction between abilities as systems.

The WHO has the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health.

Their document states:
	- "As a classification, ICIDH-2 systematically groups different domains
		for a person in a given health considiton (E.G. what a person with a disease
		or disordermdoes do or can do). Functioning refers to all body functions,
		activities, and participation as an umbrella term; similarly, disability
		serves as an umbrella term for impairments, activity limitations, or
		participation restrictions."

The WHO ICIDH-2 gets a description of computer use by disablied users.

There are many pieces of legislature, and initiatives worldwide:
	> Americans with Diabilities Act Standards for Accessible Design.
	> W3C Web.
	> WAI, accessibility initiave.
	> eEurope.

Gerontechnology is a new interdisciplinary scientific research in which tech is directed
to the aspirations and opportunitues of elderly persons.

Age and Training have several effects on the WWW.
	> Older users search less efficiently than young.
	> Older users had the most problems with tasks requiring 3 or more moves.
	> Older users had diffculty recalling previous information/location.

Aging is a process of dynamic diversity, and designing for an aging population requires
for the change of user characteristics.

FLexibility is key.

To describe the present situation with GUIs, and the major accessibility problems they
present to a blind and visually impaired user, we can divide the problem into three major
categories.
	> Difference in screen reading arhitecture
	> Visual metaphors, and
	> Mouse-driven control and navigation.

Difference in screen reading architecture:
	> When using a text-based system: the info is displayed using plaintext.
	> However, GUI interfaces are pixel based, and so a screen reader may not always
	  be able to read them.

Visual Metaphors:
	> Instead of using a specialised command language and explicit info, the GUI shows
	  info using familiar objects or images, which cannot be conveyed by screen reader.

Mouse-driven control and nativation:
	> With no visual feedback, navigation with the mouse is hard.
	> There is no real way to track the mouse cursor than to see it on the screen.

Many people with visual impairments use a screen reader, to read aloud the text displayed
on a screen.

In order to access commands, menus, and mouse movements, keyboard links and shortcuts are used.

The major difference between a GUI and a screen reader is the way the information is
presented.

Plaintext is a linear or 1D way of presenting info.

For example, in a desktop file system like MacOS or Windows, the files and folders are
placed on a 2D surface, and different windows are also placed on this surface.

When presenting this info using braille or a screenreader, this 2 or 3D information is
projected into 1D. Important spatial info is lost in the transfer.

The OSM, or Off-Screen Model, is the data structure that the screen reader has to maintain,
keeping all the info contained by the screen.

This includes what characters are written where on the screen, the different controls used,
and the grouping and spatial relationships between different objects.

The problem with maitaining this model is that it could become outdated if the screen
updates without updating the OSM.

Furthermore, the info in the OSSM could be insufficient if the app uses non-standardized
controls like a picture instead of a button, or text included in an image file instead of
OS-written text.

In this case, there is no way for the screen reader to recognise that the image is a button,
or that the image contains text, and so the user will miss it.

Even though the present development of accessibility in modern OS's has made is easier for
sreen readers to access screen contents, there is still trouble in translating
what is represented on the screen into braille or audio.

The 7 principles of Universal Design, to include less abled users, are:
	> Equitable Use
	> Flexibility in Use
	> Simple and Intuitive
	> Perceptible Information
	> Tolerance for Error
	> Low Physical Effort
	> Size and Space

These seven principles may be applied to:
	> Evaluating existing designs.
	> Guiding the design process.
	> Educating designers and consumers about more usable products and environemts.

Beneficiaries of universal design include:
	> People in a noisy shopping mall who can't hear a kiosk.
	> People driving their car who don't have the look at their radio to use it.
	> People who don't have their glasses with them.
	> People who are getting older.
	> People with disabilities.
	
Equitable Use: Useful and marketable to people with diverse abilities.

Flexibity in Use: Accomodates a wide range of individual preferences and abilties.

Simple and Intuitive use: Use of design is easy to understand, regardless of experience,
skill, or concentration level.

Perceptible Information: The design necessary information effectively to the user.

Tolerance for Error: The design minimizes hazards and the adverse consequences of accidental
or unintended actions.

Low Physical Effort: Design can be used efficiently and comfortably with minimal fatigue.

Size and Space and for Approach and Use: Appropriate size and space for posture, reach,
manipulation, and use, regardless of user's body size, posture, or mobility.



































