Human Computer Interaction - Personas and Empathy Maps
----------------------------------------------------------------

There is no nest UI style or approach for all users.

Consider:
	> Experts vs. Novices
	> High Freq. vs. Sporadic Use

We use User Research to idenfity the characteristics of users of the program:
	> Psychological Characteristics (motivation, attitude, etc.)
	> Knowledge and Experience (tpying skill, task proficiency)
	> Job and Task Characteristics (frequency of use, task structure)
	> Physical Characteristics (large/small person, color blindness, etc.)

Personas are meant to identify the user motivtions, expectations, and goals responsible for
driving online behaviour, bring users to life by giving them names, personalities, and often
a photo.

Personas originated in the field of marketing, but in 1999 a man named Cooper pitched
their use in systems design.

The persona is used to capture user characteristics, goals, personal backgrounds, and more.

Multiple personas can be used to capture multiple characters.

There are three layers for designing personas:
	> Establishing requirements
	> Elaborating relationships
	> Making 'em human

The most basic persona will only include the first layer, while the most elaborate will
extend to all three layers.

Layer 1 will include establishing requirements:
	> Key Distinguishing Features
	> Descriptive Dimensions
	> Objectives and Motivations
	> Source

Layer 2 will include elaborating relationships:
	> Concerns
	> Scenarios
	> Quotes

Layer 3 will include making 'em human:
	> Personal Background
	> Photo
	> System Features
	> Demographic Info
	> Tech Comfort

Some of the benefits of personas include the following:
	> More usable designs.
	> More user-centered discussions.
	> More effective communication in design teams.

Personas create a strong focus and users and their context.

We use our mind's ability to extrapolate from partial knowledge of people to create coherent
wholes and project them into new situations.

This also helps in discussions: "Why are we building this feature? Would Kate use it?".

Personas also provide a medium for communication - how many team members will realistically
read market research and usability reports?

"Kate had problems finding this feature" vs. "A selection of users had problems finding this
feature".

Personas are a useful tool in a human centered design approach to understand and communicate
user needs and requirements.

If designers want to test potential solutions, but don't have continuous access to end-users,
they can create fictional characters that can be used to represent a collection of the kinds
of people who could be using that potential solution, called personas.

Some researchers have criticized personas:
	> Real users are often perferable to personas -
	> BUT, real users are often not accessible or available.

An empathy map is a single, easy-to-digest visual that captures knowledge about a user's
behaviours and attitudes.

It is a useful tool to help system development teams better understand their users.

Empathy mapping is a simple workshop activity that can be done with stakeholders, project
managers, systems analysts, and programmers.

An empathy map is a collaborative tool.

It allows the team to gain a better understanding of their customers.

Empathy maps can be used to elaborate on user personas.

Empathy maps bridge the gap from persona to design.

Creating an effective solution requires understanding the true problem and the person
experiencing it.

The exercise of creating an empathy map helps participants consider things from the user's
perspective, along with their goals or challenges.

Empathy maps are most useful at the beginning of a design process:
	> AFTER user research but
	> BEFORE requirements and preliminary designs.

The mapping process can help synthesise research observations and reveal deeper insights
about a user's needs.

They ought to be based on research data, but can be built using knowledge gathered from
internal participants - or using existing personas.

When icnluded in early project stages, the empathy maps help development teams enter the
user's world and approach things from their POV:
	> Better understanding of the user.
	> Distilled information in one visual reference.
	> Callouts of key insights from research.
	> Fast and inexpensive.
	> Easily customizable, based on available info and goals.
	> Common understanding among teams.

The empathy map is made up of four quadrants: say, do, think, and feel.

The exact format varies, but often:
	> Thinking - What is the user thinking? What does this tell us?
	> Saying - What are some quotes and defining words from your user?
	> Doing - What actions and behaviours did you notice?
	> Feeling - What emotions might your subject be feeling?

Other common additions include:
	> Pains - Challenges and obstacles faced by the user.
	> Gains - Goals your user hopes to accomplish.

Alternate quadrants to use are:
	> Think & Feel - What really counts? Major preoccupations? Worries and aspirations?
	> Hear - What coleagues, managers, sys dev people, and friends are saying.
	> See - What does the person see? Environment, friends, workplace, etc.
	> Say & Do - What are the users actually saying and doing in their work?

Another addition to this alternate set is, again, pain and gain:
	> Pain & Gain - What are the users attitudes and behaviours in work and to other?

Pain can be fears, frustrations, and obstacles, and Gain can be wants and needs, measures of
success, and obstacles.

Empathy maps can be seen used at the beginning of the design process, but, crucially, after
user research.

Sometimes when time is a factor, empathy maps may be done without user research, and based
solely on existing knowledge and stakeholder feedback.



























