Human Computer Interaction - Usability and Evaluation
---------------------------------------------------------------

Usability can be defined as "The capacity to be used by humans easily and effectively where;
easily means to a specified level of subjective assessment, and effectively means to a
specfied level of human performance".

Usability affords the user easy access to the product's functions.

Guidelines are a basis for determining a course of action.

Principles are a basic rule that guide or influence thoughts or actions.

Theories are general principles that explain or predict facts or events.

With guidelines, an interface designer can:
	> Develop a shared language.
	> Promote consistency in design.
	> Record best practices (for reporting).

Accessibility addresses discriminatory aspects related to equivalent user experience for
people with disabilities.

Web accessibility can mean that people with disabilities can equally percieve, understand,
navigate, and interact with websites and tools.

It also means they can contribute equally without barriers.

Web content has Accessibility Guidelines called the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines.

Some WCAG Guidelines:
	> Provide a text equivalent for every non-text element.
	> Ensure that information does not rely on color perception.
	> Avoid causing the screen to flicker.
	> Provide an auditory description of the visual info in multimedia presentations.
	> For multimedia, ensure that timing of alternative descriptions is synced with
	  the presentation.
	> Use the simplest and clearest language possible.

Smith and Mosier (1986) offer five high-level objectives as part of their guidelines for
data entry:
	> Consistency of data entry transactions.
	> Minimal input actions by user.
	> Minimal memory load on users.
	> Compatibility of data entry with display.
	> Flexibility of user control of data entry.

Generally, principles:
	> Are more fundamental, widely available, and enduring than guidelines.
	> Are largely independent of technology.
	> Often need more clarification.

For any system or product:
	> Principles of Universal Design - can be applied to any system or product used by
	  people.

For computer systems:	
	> Nielsen's USability Principles - are mostly used as a basis for evaluating
	  prototypes and existing systems.

There are advantages and disadvantages of running expert usability evaluations:
	> There can be relatively few ethical and practical issues compared to user testing.
	> It can be difficult and expensive to fnd experts.
	> Important problems may be missed.
	> Many problems identified are trivial.
	> Experts may have biases too.

There are two types of evaluation:
	> Formative evaluation is done at different stages of development to check that
	  the product meets user needs..	
	> Summative evaluation assesses the quality of a finished product.

What should be evaluated includes early ideas for conceptual models, early prototypes of the
new system, and later, more complete prototypes.

Evaluation can be done throughout design, from first descriptions, sketches, etc.

Design proceeds through the iterative cycle of design-test-redesign.

Evaluation is a key ingredient for a successful design.

Evaluation paradigms include:
	> Expert Reviews
	> USability Testing
	> Survey Istruments
	> Acceptance Testing

Expert review methods include heuristic evaluation, guidelines review, cosistency
inspection, cognitive walthrough, and formal usability inspection.

User centered evaluation approach is an evaluation method for prototypes, and includes
such methods as Expert Evaluation, Preditcive Evaluation, and Empirical Evaluation.

These use, respectively, heuristics and wlakthroughs, testing against an engineered model
and watching users use the product.

Usability testing involves measuring typical user's performance on tasks ypical of those
for which the system was designed.

Performance is generally measured on number of errors and time to complete.

Forms of usability testing:
	> Paper Mockups
	> Discount Usability Testing
	> Competitive Usability Testing
	> Universal Usability Testing
	> Field tests.
	> Remote usability Test
	> "Can you break this?" Testing









inc
























