Human COmputer Interaction - Foundations Metaphors, Perception and Cognition
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The user is the most important entity in the system.

There are many different categories of users, making it impossible to consider them all.

We can, however, group users together to make types more managable.

Nondiscretionary Users are users for whom the computer is part of their employment.
	> Time and effort in learning to use the computer are willingly invested.
	> A high motivation is often used to overcome low usability characteristics.

Discretionary Users are more self-directed, not told how to work.
	> It is the result, not the means, that are more important.
	> Utilisation is not necessary, and they won't invest extra effort the use the it.
	> They don't show high motivation, and are easily disenchanted.

For nondiscretionaries, productivity is the most important factor.

The interface is still important, but the user is likely willing to invest time and money
in training.

It is a niche application area, usually with one type of user.

For discretionaries, the interface is very important, often the first impression of the
system.

One must cater for many different user types, and sell the user on the product.

If the system is perceieved as not acheiving results with minimal effort, it may be refused.

There are also Novice and Expert users.

Novice:
	> System features should assist in recognition - menus, prompts, help screens.
	> Needs to use restriced vocabulary, simple tasks, small number of options.
	> Practice is viewed as an aid to move up to expert practice.

Expert:
	> Rely upon free recall.
	> Need less information feedback.
	> Seek efficiency by bypassing novice memory aids, reducing keystrokes and
	  summarising information.

There is also a factor in age.

Young users tend to be more active learners, drawing on physical and social experiences.

They learn by doing things, and require things to touch, see, and hear.

Prior to age 8, children rely on visual and auditory perception for knowledge.

Learning is through firsthand experience.

Design Guidelines for Young User - Wyeth & Purchse, 2003
	> Activities are open ended and discovery-oriented.
	> Interaction encourages child-initiated play.
	> Involve active manipulation and transformation of real materials.
	> Entry-level knowledge and skill is kept to a minimum.
	> Provision is made for children's varied skill and ability levels.
	> Construction activies that involve design, creation, and evaluation processes.

For older users, mobility, vision, memory, and hearing can all be impairments in system use.

Design Guidelines for Older Users - Hawthorn, 2003
	> Simplify screen design.	
	> Provide users with simple linear search spaces with few options.
	> Increase the size of fonts and controls.
	> Reduce both windows management tasks and scrolling.
	> Ensure contrast between text and background.
	> Menus can introduce problems, toolbars may be an alternative.

Culture and international diversity can also affect how people interact with a system.

Characters and numerals, special characters and diacriticals can be different.

Some cultures read right-to-left instead of left-to-right.

Data and time formats, as well as measures, numeric, and currency formats, can all differ.

Phone numbers and addresses, along with names and titles might also work differently.

Different people and cultures might also expect different thigs of capitalisation,
puctuation, sorting, icons and buttons, grammar, spelling, policies, tone, and etiquette.

Designers must plan early on in order to accomodate users with disabilities, as their
needs are more critical.

There are both physically and congitively disabled users.

Physically disabled users can have impairments like:
	> Lack of mobility.
	> Low vision.
	> Poor hearing.

Alternaive channels of interactions for them might be speech recognition, tune recognition,
lip-reading, and body-electric sensors.

The more sophisticated a system is, the more specialised its target group gets.

Design Guidelines for Physically Disabled Users - Nielsen, 1995
	> Provide keyboard access to app features.
	> Follow key-mapping guidelines or the local environment.
	> Avoid placing frequently used functions deep in a menu structure.
	> Do not hard-code colours, graphics, or font sizes and styles.
	> Provide visual information that is redunant with audible information.
	> Allow users to configure frequency and volume of audio queues.

Examples of congitive disabilities include learning disabilities, dyslexia, and poor memory.

Changes can be made to accomodate thee users by improving layouts, controlling vocabulary,
and limiting short-term memory demand.



 





















